***

State of the Union Address
George W. Bush
September 20, 2001

Mr. Speaker, Mr. President Pro Tempore, members of Congress, and fellow
Americans:

In the normal course of events, Presidents come to this chamber to
report on the state of the Union.  Tonight, no such report is needed.
It has already been delivered by the American people.

We have seen it in the courage of passengers, who rushed terrorists to
save others on the ground -- passengers like an exceptional man named
Todd Beamer.  And would you please help me to welcome his wife, Lisa
Beamer, here tonight.  (Applause.)

We have seen the state of our Union in the endurance of rescuers,
working past exhaustion.  We have seen the unfurling of flags, the
lighting of candles, the giving of blood, the saying of prayers -- in
English, Hebrew, and Arabic.  We have seen the decency of a loving and
giving people who have made the grief of strangers their own.

My fellow citizens, for the last nine days, the entire world has seen
for itself the state of our Union -- and it is strong.  (Applause.)

Tonight we are a country awakened to danger and called to defend
freedom.  Our grief has turned to anger, and anger to resolution.
Whether we bring our enemies to justice, or bring justice to our
enemies, justice will be done.  (Applause.)

I thank the Congress for its leadership at such an important time.  All
of America was touched on the evening of the tragedy to see Republicans
and Democrats joined together on the steps of this Capitol, singing "God
Bless America."  And you did more than sing; you acted, by delivering
$40 billion to rebuild our communities and meet the needs of our
military.

Speaker Hastert, Minority Leader Gephardt, Majority Leader Daschle and
Senator Lott, I thank you for your friendship, for your leadership and
for your service to our country.  (Applause.)

And on behalf of the American people, I thank the world for its
outpouring of support.  America will never forget the sounds of our
National Anthem playing at Buckingham Palace, on the streets of Paris,
and at Berlin's Brandenburg Gate.

We will not forget South Korean children gathering to pray outside our
embassy in Seoul, or the prayers of sympathy offered at a mosque in
Cairo.  We will not forget moments of silence and days of mourning in
Australia and Africa and Latin America.

Nor will we forget the citizens of 80 other nations who died with our
own:  dozens of Pakistanis; more than 130 Israelis; more than 250
citizens of India; men and women from El Salvador, Iran, Mexico and
Japan; and hundreds of British citizens.  America has no truer friend
than Great Britain.  (Applause.)   Once again, we are joined together in
a great cause -- so honored the British Prime Minister has crossed an
ocean to show his unity of purpose with America.  Thank you for coming,
friend.  (Applause.)

On September the 11th, enemies of freedom committed an act of war
against our country.  Americans have known wars -- but for the past 136
years, they have been wars on foreign soil, except for one Sunday in
1941.  Americans have known the casualties of war -- but not at the
center of a great city on a peaceful morning.  Americans have known
surprise attacks -- but never before on thousands of civilians.  All of
this was brought upon us in a single day -- and night fell on a
different world, a world where freedom itself is under attack.

Americans have many questions tonight.  Americans are asking:  Who
attacked our country?  The evidence we have gathered all points to a
collection of loosely affiliated terrorist organizations known as al
Qaeda.  They are the same murderers indicted for bombing American
embassies in Tanzania and Kenya, and responsible for bombing the USS
Cole.

Al Qaeda is to terror what the mafia is to crime.  But its goal is not
making money; its goal is remaking the world -- and imposing its radical
beliefs on people everywhere.

The terrorists practice a fringe form of Islamic extremism that has been
rejected by Muslim scholars and the vast majority of Muslim clerics -- a
fringe movement that perverts the peaceful teachings of Islam.  The
terrorists' directive commands them to kill Christians and Jews, to kill
all Americans, and make no distinction among military and civilians,
including women and children.

This group and its leader -- a person named Osama bin Laden -- are
linked to many other organizations in different countries, including the
Egyptian Islamic Jihad and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan.  There
are thousands of these terrorists in more than 60 countries.  They are
recruited from their own nations and neighborhoods and brought to camps
in places like Afghanistan, where they are trained in the tactics of
terror.  They are sent back to their homes or sent to hide in countries
around the world to plot evil and destruction.

The leadership of al Qaeda has great influence in Afghanistan and
supports the Taliban regime in controlling most of that country.  In
Afghanistan, we see al Qaeda's vision for the world.

Afghanistan's people have been brutalized -- many are starving and many
have fled.  Women are not allowed to attend school.  You can be jailed
for owning a television.  Religion can be practiced only as their
leaders dictate.  A man can be jailed in Afghanistan if his beard is not
long enough.

The United States respects the people of Afghanistan -- after all, we
are currently its largest source of humanitarian aid -- but we condemn
the Taliban regime.  (Applause.)  It is not only repressing its own
people, it is threatening people everywhere by sponsoring and sheltering
and supplying terrorists.  By aiding and abetting murder, the Taliban
regime is committing murder.

And tonight, the United States of America makes the following demands on
the Taliban:  Deliver to United States authorities all the leaders of al
Qaeda who hide in your land. (Applause.)  Release all foreign nationals,
including American citizens, you have unjustly imprisoned.  Protect
foreign journalists, diplomats and aid workers in your country.  Close
immediately and permanently every terrorist training camp in
Afghanistan, and hand over every terrorist, and every person in their
support structure, to appropriate authorities.  (Applause.)  Give the
United States full access to terrorist training camps, so we can make
sure they are no longer operating.

These demands are not open to negotiation or discussion.  (Applause.)
The Taliban must act, and act immediately.  They will hand over the
terrorists, or they will share in their fate.

I also want to speak tonight directly to Muslims throughout the world.
We respect your faith.  It's practiced freely by many millions of
Americans, and by millions more in countries that America counts as
friends.  Its teachings are good and peaceful, and those who commit evil
in the name of Allah blaspheme the name of Allah.  (Applause.)  The
terrorists are traitors to their own faith, trying, in effect, to hijack
Islam itself.  The enemy of America is not our many Muslim friends; it
is not our many Arab friends.  Our enemy is a radical network of
terrorists, and every government that supports them.  (Applause.)

Our war on terror begins with al Qaeda, but it does not end there.  It
will not end until every terrorist group of global reach has been found,
stopped and defeated.  (Applause.)

Americans are asking, why do they hate us?  They hate what we see right
here in this chamber -- a democratically elected government.  Their
leaders are self-appointed.  They hate our freedoms -- our freedom of
religion, our freedom of speech, our freedom to vote and assemble and
disagree with each other.

They want to overthrow existing governments in many Muslim countries,
such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan.  They want to drive Israel out
of the Middle East.  They want to drive Christians and Jews out of vast
regions of Asia and Africa.

These terrorists kill not merely to end lives, but to disrupt and end a
way of life.  With every atrocity, they hope that America grows fearful,
retreating from the world and forsaking our friends.  They stand against
us, because we stand in their way.

We are not deceived by their pretenses to piety.  We have seen their
kind before.  They are the heirs of all the murderous ideologies of the
20th century.  By sacrificing human life to serve their radical visions
-- by abandoning every value except the will to power -- they follow in
the path of fascism, and Nazism, and totalitarianism.  And they will
follow that path all the way, to where it ends:  in history's unmarked
grave of discarded lies. (Applause.)

Americans are asking:  How will we fight and win this war?   We will
direct every resource at our command -- every means of diplomacy, every
tool of intelligence, every instrument of law enforcement, every
financial influence, and every necessary weapon of war -- to the
disruption and to the defeat of the global terror network.

This war will not be like the war against Iraq a decade ago, with a
decisive liberation of territory and a swift conclusion.  It will not
look like the air war above Kosovo two years ago, where no ground troops
were used and not a single American was lost in combat.

Our response involves far more than instant retaliation and isolated
strikes.  Americans should not expect one battle, but a lengthy
campaign, unlike any other we have ever seen.  It may include dramatic
strikes, visible on TV, and covert operations, secret even in success.
We will starve terrorists of funding, turn them one against another,
drive them from place to place, until there is no refuge or no rest.
And we will pursue nations that provide aid or safe haven to terrorism.
Every nation, in every region, now has a decision to make. Either you
are with us, or you are with the terrorists.  (Applause.)  From this day
forward, any nation that continues to harbor or support terrorism will
be regarded by the United States as a hostile regime.

Our nation has been put on notice:  We are not immune from attack.  We
will take defensive measures against terrorism to protect Americans.
Today, dozens of federal departments and agencies, as well as state and
local governments, have responsibilities affecting homeland security.
These efforts must be coordinated at the highest level.  So tonight I
announce the creation of a Cabinet-level position reporting directly to
me -- the Office of Homeland Security.

And tonight I also announce a distinguished American to lead this
effort, to strengthen American security: a military veteran, an
effective governor, a true patriot, a trusted friend -- Pennsylvania's
Tom Ridge.  (Applause.)  He will lead, oversee and coordinate a
comprehensive national strategy to safeguard our country against
terrorism, and respond to any attacks that may come.

These measures are essential.  But the only way to defeat terrorism as a
threat to our way of life is to stop it, eliminate it, and destroy it
where it grows.  (Applause.)

Many will be involved in this effort, from FBI agents to intelligence
operatives to the reservists we have called to active duty.  All deserve
our thanks, and all have our prayers.  And tonight, a few miles from the
damaged Pentagon, I have a message for our military:  Be ready.  I've
called the Armed Forces to alert, and there is a reason.  The hour is
coming when America will act, and you will make us proud.  (Applause.)

This is not, however, just America's fight.  And what is at stake is not
just America's freedom.  This is the world's fight.  This is
civilization's fight.  This is the fight of all who believe in progress
and pluralism, tolerance and freedom.

We ask every nation to join us.  We will ask, and we will need, the help
of police forces, intelligence services, and banking systems around the
world.  The United States is grateful that many nations and many
international organizations have already responded -- with sympathy and
with support.  Nations from Latin America, to Asia, to Africa, to
Europe, to the Islamic world.  Perhaps the NATO Charter reflects best
the attitude of the world:  An attack on one is an attack on all.

The civilized world is rallying to America's side.  They understand that
if this terror goes unpunished, their own cities, their own citizens may
be next.  Terror, unanswered, can not only bring down buildings, it can
threaten the stability of legitimate governments.  And you know what --
we're not going to allow it.  (Applause.)

Americans are asking:  What is expected of us?  I ask you to live your
lives, and hug your children.  I know many citizens have fears tonight,
and I ask you to be calm and resolute, even in the face of a continuing
threat.

I ask you to uphold the values of America, and remember why so many have
come here.  We are in a fight for our principles, and our first
responsibility is to live by them.  No one should be singled out for
unfair treatment or unkind words because of their ethnic background or
religious faith.  (Applause.)

I ask you to continue to support the victims of this tragedy with your
contributions.  Those who want to give can go to a central source of
information, libertyunites.org, to find the names of groups providing
direct help in New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia.

The thousands of FBI agents who are now at work in this investigation
may need your cooperation, and I ask you to give it.

I ask for your patience, with the delays and inconveniences that may
accompany tighter security; and for your patience in what will be a long
struggle.

I ask your continued participation and confidence in the American
economy.  Terrorists attacked a symbol of American prosperity.  They did
not touch its source.  America is successful because of the hard work,
and creativity, and enterprise of our people.  These were the true
strengths of our economy before September 11th, and they are our
strengths today. (Applause.)

And, finally, please continue praying for the victims of terror and
their families, for those in uniform, and for our great country.  Prayer
has comforted us in sorrow, and will help strengthen us for the journey
ahead.

Tonight I thank my fellow Americans for what you have already done and
for what you will do.  And ladies and gentlemen of the Congress, I thank
you, their representatives, for what you have already done and for what
we will do together.

Tonight, we face new and sudden national challenges.  We will come
together to improve air safety, to dramatically expand the number of air
marshals on domestic flights, and take new measures to prevent
hijacking.  We will come together to promote stability and keep our
airlines flying, with direct assistance during this emergency.
(Applause.)

We will come together to give law enforcement the additional tools it
needs to track down terror here at home.  (Applause.)  We will come
together to strengthen our intelligence capabilities to know the plans
of terrorists before they act, and find them before they strike.
(Applause.)

We will come together to take active steps that strengthen America's
economy, and put our people back to work.

Tonight we welcome two leaders who embody the extraordinary spirit of
all New Yorkers:  Governor George Pataki, and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.
(Applause.)  As a symbol of America's resolve, my administration will
work with Congress, and these two leaders, to show the world that we
will rebuild New York City.  (Applause.)

After all that has just passed -- all the lives taken, and all the
possibilities and hopes that died with them -- it is natural to wonder
if America's future is one of fear.  Some speak of an age of terror.  I
know there are struggles ahead, and dangers to face.  But this country
will define our times, not be defined by them.  As long as the United
States of America is determined and strong, this will not be an age of
terror; this will be an age of liberty, here and across the world.
(Applause.)

Great harm has been done to us.  We have suffered great loss.  And in
our grief and anger we have found our mission and our moment.  Freedom
and fear are at war.  The advance of human freedom -- the great
achievement of our time, and the great hope of every time -- now depends
on us.  Our nation -- this generation -- will lift a dark threat of
violence from our people and our future.  We will rally the world to
this cause by our efforts, by our courage.  We will not tire, we will
not falter, and we will not fail.  (Applause.)

It is my hope that in the months and years ahead, life will return
almost to normal.  We'll go back to our lives and routines, and that is
good.  Even grief recedes with time and grace.  But our resolve must not
pass.  Each of us will remember what happened that day, and to whom it
happened.  We'll remember the moment the news came -- where we were and
what we were doing.  Some will remember an image of a fire, or a story
of rescue.  Some will carry memories of a face and a voice gone forever.

And I will carry this:  It is the police shield of a man named George
Howard, who died at the World Trade Center trying to save others.  It
was given to me by his mom, Arlene, as a proud memorial to her son.
This is my reminder of lives that ended, and a task that does not end.
(Applause.)

I will not forget this wound to our country or those who inflicted it.
I will not yield; I will not rest; I will not relent in waging this
struggle for freedom and security for the American people.

The course of this conflict is not known, yet its outcome is certain.
Freedom and fear, justice and cruelty, have always been at war, and we
know that God is not neutral between them.  (Applause.)

Fellow citizens, we'll meet violence with patient justice -- assured of
the rightness of our cause, and confident of the victories to come.  In
all that lies before us, may God grant us wisdom, and may He watch over
the United States of America.

Thank you.  (Applause.)

***

State of the Union Address
George W. Bush
January 29, 2002

Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of
Congress, distinguished guests, fellow citizens: As we gather tonight,
our nation is at war, our economy is in recession, and the civilized
world faces unprecedented dangers. Yet the state of our Union has never
been stronger. (Applause.)

We last met in an hour of shock and suffering. In four short months, our
nation has comforted the victims, begun to rebuild New York and the
Pentagon, rallied a great coalition, captured, arrested, and rid the
world of thousands of terrorists, destroyed Afghanistan's terrorist
training camps, saved a people from starvation, and freed a country from
brutal oppression. (Applause.)

The American flag flies again over our embassy in Kabul. Terrorists who
once occupied Afghanistan now occupy cells at Guantanamo Bay.
(Applause.) And terrorist leaders who urged followers to sacrifice their
lives are running for their own. (Applause.)

America and Afghanistan are now allies against terror. We'll be partners
in rebuilding that country. And this evening we welcome the
distinguished interim leader of a liberated Afghanistan: Chairman Hamid
Karzai. (Applause.)

The last time we met in this chamber, the mothers and daughters of
Afghanistan were captives in their own homes, forbidden from working or
going to school. Today women are free, and are part of Afghanistan's new
government. And we welcome the new Minister of Women's Affairs, Doctor
Sima Samar. (Applause.)

Our progress is a tribute to the spirit of the Afghan people, to the
resolve of our coalition, and to the might of the United States
military. (Applause.) When I called our troops into action, I did so
with complete confidence in their courage and skill. And tonight, thanks
to them, we are winning the war on terror. (Applause.) The men and women
of our Armed Forces have delivered a message now clear to every enemy of
the United States: Even 7,000 miles away, across oceans and continents,
on mountaintops and in caves--you will not escape the justice of this
nation. (Applause.)

For many Americans, these four months have brought sorrow, and pain that
will never completely go away. Every day a retired firefighter returns
to Ground Zero, to feel closer to his two sons who died there. At a
memorial in New York, a little boy left his football with a note for his
lost father: Dear Daddy, please take this to heaven. I don't want to
play football until I can play with you again some day.

Last month, at the grave of her husband, Michael, a CIA officer and
Marine who died in Mazur-e-Sharif, Shannon Spann said these words of
farewell: "Semper Fi, my love." Shannon is with us tonight. (Applause.)

Shannon, I assure you and all who have lost a loved one that our cause
is just, and our country will never forget the debt we owe Michael and
all who gave their lives for freedom.

Our cause is just, and it continues. Our discoveries in Afghanistan
confirmed our worst fears, and showed us the true scope of the task
ahead. We have seen the depth of our enemies' hatred in videos, where
they laugh about the loss of innocent life. And the depth of their
hatred is equaled by the madness of the destruction they design. We have
found diagrams of American nuclear power plants and public water
facilities, detailed instructions for making chemical weapons,
surveillance maps of American cities, and thorough descriptions of
landmarks in America and throughout the world.

What we have found in Afghanistan confirms that, far from ending there,
our war against terror is only beginning. Most of the 19 men who
hijacked planes on September the 11th were trained in Afghanistan's
camps, and so were tens of thousands of others. Thousands of dangerous
killers, schooled in the methods of murder, often supported by outlaw
regimes, are now spread throughout the world like ticking time bombs,
set to go off without warning.

Thanks to the work of our law enforcement officials and coalition
partners, hundreds of terrorists have been arrested. Yet, tens of
thousands of trained terrorists are still at large. These enemies view
the entire world as a battlefield, and we must pursue them wherever they
are. (Applause.) So long as training camps operate, so long as nations
harbor terrorists, freedom is at risk. And America and our allies must
not, and will not, allow it. (Applause.)

Our nation will continue to be steadfast and patient and persistent in
the pursuit of two great objectives. First, we will shut down terrorist
camps, disrupt terrorist plans, and bring terrorists to justice. And,
second, we must prevent the terrorists and regimes who seek chemical,
biological or nuclear weapons from threatening the United States and the
world. (Applause.)

Our military has put the terror training camps of Afghanistan out of
business, yet camps still exist in at least a dozen countries. A
terrorist underworld--including groups like Hamas, Hezbollah, Islamic
Jihad, Jaish-i-Mohammed--operates in remote jungles and deserts, and
hides in the centers of large cities.

While the most visible military action is in Afghanistan, America is
acting elsewhere. We now have troops in the Philippines, helping to
train that country's armed forces to go after terrorist cells that have
executed an American, and still hold hostages. Our soldiers, working
with the Bosnian government, seized terrorists who were plotting to bomb
our embassy. Our Navy is patrolling the coast of Africa to block the
shipment of weapons and the establishment of terrorist camps in Somalia.

My hope is that all nations will heed our call, and eliminate the
terrorist parasites who threaten their countries and our own. Many
nations are acting forcefully. Pakistan is now cracking down on terror,
and I admire the strong leadership of President Musharraf. (Applause.)

But some governments will be timid in the face of terror. And make no
mistake about it: If they do not act, America will. (Applause.)

Our second goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from
threatening America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass
destruction. Some of these regimes have been pretty quiet since
September the 11th. But we know their true nature. North Korea is a
regime arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction, while
starving its citizens.

Iran aggressively pursues these weapons and exports terror, while an
unelected few repress the Iranian people's hope for freedom.

Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support
terror. The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax, and nerve gas,
and nuclear weapons for over a decade. This is a regime that has already
used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens--leaving the
bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children. This is a regime
that agreed to international inspections--then kicked out the
inspectors. This is a regime that has something to hide from the
civilized world.

States like these, and their terrorist allies, constitute an axis of
evil, arming to threaten the peace of the world. By seeking weapons of
mass destruction, these regimes pose a grave and growing danger. They
could provide these arms to terrorists, giving them the means to match
their hatred. They could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the
United States. In any of these cases, the price of indifference would be
catastrophic.

We will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and their
state sponsors the materials, technology, and expertise to make and
deliver weapons of mass destruction. We will develop and deploy
effective missile defenses to protect America and our allies from sudden
attack. (Applause.) And all nations should know: America will do what is
necessary to ensure our nation's security.

We'll be deliberate, yet time is not on our side. I will not wait on
events, while dangers gather. I will not stand by, as peril draws closer
and closer. The United States of America will not permit the world's
most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world's most destructive
weapons. (Applause.)

Our war on terror is well begun, but it is only begun. This campaign may
not be finished on our watch--yet it must be and it will be waged on our
watch.

We can't stop short. If we stop now--leaving terror camps intact and
terror states unchecked--our sense of security would be false and
temporary. History has called America and our allies to action, and it
is both our responsibility and our privilege to fight freedom's fight.
(Applause.)

Our first priority must always be the security of our nation, and that
will be reflected in the budget I send to Congress. My budget supports
three great goals for America: We will win this war; we'll protect our
homeland; and we will revive our economy.

September the 11th brought out the best in America, and the best in this
Congress. And I join the American people in applauding your unity and
resolve. (Applause.) Now Americans deserve to have this same spirit
directed toward addressing problems here at home. I'm a proud member of
my party--yet as we act to win the war, protect our people, and create
jobs in America, we must act, first and foremost, not as Republicans,
not as Democrats, but as Americans. (Applause.)

It costs a lot to fight this war. We have spent more than a billion
dollars a month--over $30 million a day--and we must be prepared for
future operations. Afghanistan proved that expensive precision weapons
defeat the enemy and spare innocent lives, and we need more of them. We
need to replace aging aircraft and make our military more agile, to put
our troops anywhere in the world quickly and safely. Our men and women
in uniform deserve the best weapons, the best equipment, the best
training--and they also deserve another pay raise. (Applause.)

My budget includes the largest increase in defense spending in two
decades --because while the price of freedom and security is high, it is
never too high. Whatever it costs to defend our country, we will pay.
(Applause.)

The next priority of my budget is to do everything possible to protect
our citizens and strengthen our nation against the ongoing threat of
another attack. Time and distance from the events of September the 11th
will not make us safer unless we act on its lessons. America is no
longer protected by vast oceans. We are protected from attack only by
vigorous action abroad, and increased vigilance at home.

My budget nearly doubles funding for a sustained strategy of homeland
security, focused on four key areas: bioterrorism, emergency response,
airport and border security, and improved intelligence. We will develop
vaccines to fight anthrax and other deadly diseases. We'll increase
funding to help states and communities train and equip our heroic police
and firefighters. (Applause.) We will improve intelligence collection
and sharing, expand patrols at our borders, strengthen the security of
air travel, and use technology to track the arrivals and departures of
visitors to the United States. (Applause.)

Homeland security will make America not only stronger, but, in many
ways, better. Knowledge gained from bioterrorism research will improve
public health. Stronger police and fire departments will mean safer
neighborhoods. Stricter border enforcement will help combat illegal
drugs. (Applause.) And as government works to better secure our
homeland, America will continue to depend on the eyes and ears of alert
citizens.

A few days before Christmas, an airline flight attendant spotted a
passenger lighting a match. The crew and passengers quickly subdued the
man, who had been trained by al Qaeda and was armed with explosives. The
people on that plane were alert and, as a result, likely saved nearly
200 lives. And tonight we welcome and thank flight attendants Hermis
Moutardier and Christina Jones. (Applause.)

Once we have funded our national security and our homeland security, the
final great priority of my budget is economic security for the American
people. (Applause.) To achieve these great national objectives--to win
the war, protect the homeland, and revitalize our economy--our budget
will run a deficit that will be small and short-term, so long as
Congress restrains spending and acts in a fiscally responsible manner.
(Applause.) We have clear priorities and we must act at home with the
same purpose and resolve we have shown overseas: We'll prevail in the
war, and we will defeat this recession. (Applause.)

Americans who have lost their jobs need our help and I support extending
unemployment benefits and direct assistance for health care coverage.
(Applause.) Yet, American workers want more than unemployment checks--
they want a steady paycheck. (Applause.) When America works, America
prospers, so my economic security plan can be summed up in one word:
jobs. (Applause.)

Good jobs begin with good schools, and here we've made a fine start.
(Applause.) Republicans and Democrats worked together to achieve
historic education reform so that no child is left behind. I was proud
to work with members of both parties: Chairman John Boehner and
Congressman George Miller. (Applause.) Senator Judd Gregg. (Applause.)
And I was so proud of our work, I even had nice things to say about my
friend, Ted Kennedy. (Laughter and applause.) I know the folks at the
Crawford coffee shop couldn't believe I'd say such a
thing--(laughter)--but our work on this bill shows what is possible if
we set aside posturing and focus on results. (Applause.)

There is more to do. We need to prepare our children to read and succeed
in school with improved Head Start and early childhood development
programs. (Applause.) We must upgrade our teacher colleges and teacher
training and launch a major recruiting drive with a great goal for
America: a quality teacher in every classroom. (Applause.)

Good jobs also depend on reliable and affordable energy. This Congress
must act to encourage conservation, promote technology, build
infrastructure, and it must act to increase energy production at home so
America is less dependent on foreign oil. (Applause.)

Good jobs depend on expanded trade. Selling into new markets creates new
jobs, so I ask Congress to finally approve trade promotion authority.
(Applause.) On these two key issues, trade and energy, the House of
Representatives has acted to create jobs, and I urge the Senate to pass
this legislation. (Applause.)

Good jobs depend on sound tax policy. (Applause.) Last year, some in
this hall thought my tax relief plan was too small; some thought it was
too big. (Applause.) But when the checks arrived in the mail, most
Americans thought tax relief was just about right. (Applause.) Congress
listened to the people and responded by reducing tax rates, doubling the
child credit, and ending the death tax. For the sake of long-term growth
and to help Americans plan for the future, let's make these tax cuts
permanent. (Applause.)

The way out of this recession, the way to create jobs, is to grow the
economy by encouraging investment in factories and equipment, and by
speeding up tax relief so people have more money to spend. For the sake
of American workers, let's pass a stimulus package. (Applause.)

Good jobs must be the aim of welfare reform. As we reauthorize these
important reforms, we must always remember the goal is to reduce
dependency on government and offer every American the dignity of a job.
(Applause.)

Americans know economic security can vanish in an instant without health
security. I ask Congress to join me this year to enact a patients' bill
of rights--(applause)--to give uninsured workers credits to help buy
health coverage--(applause)--to approve an historic increase in the
spending for veterans' health--(applause)--and to give seniors a sound
and modern Medicare system that includes coverage for prescription
drugs. (Applause.)

A good job should lead to security in retirement. I ask Congress to
enact new safeguards for 401K and pension plans. (Applause.) Employees
who have worked hard and saved all their lives should not have to risk
losing everything if their company fails. (Applause.) Through stricter
accounting standards and tougher disclosure requirements, corporate
America must be made more accountable to employees and shareholders and
held to the highest standards of conduct. (Applause.)

Retirement security also depends upon keeping the commitments of Social
Security, and we will. We must make Social Security financially stable
and allow personal retirement accounts for younger workers who choose
them. (Applause.)

Members, you and I will work together in the months ahead on other
issues: productive farm policy--(applause)--a cleaner
environment--(applause) --broader home ownership, especially among
minorities--(applause)--and ways to encourage the good work of charities
and faith-based groups. (Applause.) I ask you to join me on these
important domestic issues in the same spirit of cooperation we've
applied to our war against terrorism. (Applause.)

During these last few months, I've been humbled and privileged to see
the true character of this country in a time of testing. Our enemies
believed America was weak and materialistic, that we would splinter in
fear and selfishness. They were as wrong as they are evil. (Applause.)

The American people have responded magnificently, with courage and
compassion, strength and resolve. As I have met the heroes, hugged the
families, and looked into the tired faces of rescuers, I have stood in
awe of the American people.

And I hope you will join me--I hope you will join me in expressing
thanks to one American for the strength and calm and comfort she brings
to our nation in crisis, our First Lady, Laura Bush. (Applause.)

None of us would ever wish the evil that was done on September the 11th.
Yet after America was attacked, it was as if our entire country looked
into a mirror and saw our better selves. We were reminded that we are
citizens, with obligations to each other, to our country, and to
history. We began to think less of the goods we can accumulate, and more
about the good we can do.

For too long our culture has said, "If it feels good, do it." Now
America is embracing a new ethic and a new creed: "Let's roll."
(Applause.) In the sacrifice of soldiers, the fierce brotherhood of
firefighters, and the bravery and generosity of ordinary citizens, we
have glimpsed what a new culture of responsibility could look like. We
want to be a nation that serves goals larger than self. We've been
offered a unique opportunity, and we must not let this moment pass.
(Applause.)

My call tonight is for every American to commit at least two
years--4,000 hours over the rest of your lifetime--to the service of
your neighbors and your nation. (Applause.) Many are already serving,
and I thank you. If you aren't sure how to help, I've got a good place
to start. To sustain and extend the best that has emerged in America, I
invite you to join the new USA Freedom Corps. The Freedom Corps will
focus on three areas of need: responding in case of crisis at home;
rebuilding our communities; and extending American compassion throughout
the world.

One purpose of the USA Freedom Corps will be homeland security. America
needs retired doctors and nurses who can be mobilized in major
emergencies; volunteers to help police and fire departments;
transportation and utility workers well-trained in spotting danger.

Our country also needs citizens working to rebuild our communities. We
need mentors to love children, especially children whose parents are in
prison. And we need more talented teachers in troubled schools. USA
Freedom Corps will expand and improve the good efforts of AmeriCorps and
Senior Corps to recruit more than 200,000 new volunteers.

And America needs citizens to extend the compassion of our country to
every part of the world. So we will renew the promise of the Peace
Corps, double its volunteers over the next five years--(applause)--and
ask it to join a new effort to encourage development and education and
opportunity in the Islamic world. (Applause.)

This time of adversity offers a unique moment of opportunity--a moment
we must seize to change our culture. Through the gathering momentum of
millions of acts of service and decency and kindness, I know we can
overcome evil with greater good. (Applause.) And we have a great
opportunity during this time of war to lead the world toward the values
that will bring lasting peace.

All fathers and mothers, in all societies, want their children to be
educated, and live free from poverty and violence. No people on Earth
yearn to be oppressed, or aspire to servitude, or eagerly await the
midnight knock of the secret police.

If anyone doubts this, let them look to Afghanistan, where the Islamic
"street" greeted the fall of tyranny with song and celebration. Let the
skeptics look to Islam's own rich history, with its centuries of
learning, and tolerance and progress. America will lead by defending
liberty and justice because they are right and true and unchanging for
all people everywhere. (Applause.)

No nation owns these aspirations, and no nation is exempt from them. We
have no intention of imposing our culture. But America will always stand
firm for the non-negotiable demands of human dignity: the rule of law;
limits on the power of the state; respect for women; private property;
free speech; equal justice; and religious tolerance. (Applause.)

America will take the side of brave men and women who advocate these
values around the world, including the Islamic world, because we have a
greater objective than eliminating threats and containing resentment. We
seek a just and peaceful world beyond the war on terror.

In this moment of opportunity, a common danger is erasing old rivalries.
America is working with Russia and China and India, in ways we have
never before, to achieve peace and prosperity. In every region, free
markets and free trade and free societies are proving their power to
lift lives. Together with friends and allies from Europe to Asia, and
Africa to Latin America, we will demonstrate that the forces of terror
cannot stop the momentum of freedom. (Applause.)

The last time I spoke here, I expressed the hope that life would return
to normal. In some ways, it has. In others, it never will. Those of us
who have lived through these challenging times have been changed by
them. We've come to know truths that we will never question: evil is
real, and it must be opposed. (Applause.) Beyond all differences of race
or creed, we are one country, mourning together and facing danger
together. Deep in the American character, there is honor, and it is
stronger than cynicism. And many have discovered again that even in
tragedy--especially in tragedy--God is near. (Applause.)

In a single instant, we realized that this will be a decisive decade in
the history of liberty, that we've been called to a unique role in human
events. Rarely has the world faced a choice more clear or consequential.

Our enemies send other people's children on missions of suicide and
murder. They embrace tyranny and death as a cause and a creed. We stand
for a different choice, made long ago, on the day of our founding. We
affirm it again today. We choose freedom and the dignity of every life.
(Applause.)

Steadfast in our purpose, we now press on. We have known freedom's
price. We have shown freedom's power. And in this great conflict, my
fellow Americans, we will see freedom's victory.

Thank you all. May God bless. (Applause.)

***

State of the Union Address
George W. Bush
January 28, 2003

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished
guests, fellow citizens:

Every year, by law and by custom, we meet here to consider the state of
the union. This year, we gather in this chamber deeply aware of decisive
days that lie ahead.

You and I serve our country in a time of great consequence. During this
session of Congress, we have the duty to reform domestic programs vital
to our country...and we have the opportunity to save millions of lives
abroad from a terrible disease. We will work for a prosperity that is
broadly shared...and we will answer every danger and every enemy that
threatens the American people.

In all these days of promise and days of reckoning, we can be confident.
In a whirlwind of change, and hope, and peril, our faith is sure, our
resolve is firm, and our union is strong.

This country has many challenges. We will not deny, we will not ignore,
we will not pass along our problems to other Congresses, other
presidents, and other generations. We will confront them with focus, and
clarity, and courage.

During the last two years, we have seen what can be accomplished when we
work together. To lift the standards of our public schools, we achieved
historic education reform - which must now be carried out in every
school, and every classroom, so that every child in America can read,
and learn, and succeed in life. To protect our country, we reorganized
our government and created the Department of Homeland Security - which
is mobilizing against the threats of a new era. To bring our economy out
of recession, we delivered the largest tax relief in a generation. To
insist on integrity in American business, we passed tough reforms, and
we are holding corporate criminals to account.

Some might call this a good record. I call it a good start. Tonight I
ask the House and Senate to join me in the next bold steps to serve our
fellow citizens.

Our first goal is clear: We must have an economy that grows fast enough
to employ every man and woman who seeks a job.

After recession, terrorist attacks, corporate scandals, and stock market
declines, our economy is recovering - yet it is not growing fast enough,
or strongly enough. With unemployment rising, our Nation needs more
small businesses to open, more companies to invest and expand, more
employers to put up the sign that says, "Help Wanted."

Jobs are created when the economy grows; the economy grows when
Americans have more money to spend and invest; and the best, fairest way
to make sure Americans have that money is not to tax it away in the
first place.

I am proposing that all the income tax reductions set for 2004 and 2006
be made permanent and effective this year. And under my plan, as soon as
I have signed the bill, this extra money will start showing up in
workers' paychecks. Instead of gradually reducing the marriage penalty,
we should do it now. Instead of slowly raising the child credit to a
thousand dollars, we should send the checks to American families now.

This tax relief is for everyone who pays income taxes - and it will help
our economy immediately. Ninety-two million Americans will keep - this
year - an average of almost 1,100 dollars more of their own money. A
family of four with an income of 40,000 dollars would see their federal
income taxes fall from 1,178 dollars to 45 dollars per year. And our
plan will improve the bottom line for more than 23 million small
businesses.

You, the Congress, have already passed all these reductions, and
promised them for future years. If this tax relief is good for Americans
three, or five, or seven years from now, it is even better for Americans
today.

We also strengthen the economy by treating investors equally in our tax
laws. It is fair to tax a company's profits. It is not fair to again tax
the shareholder on the same profits. To boost investor confidence, and
to help the nearly 10 million seniors who receive dividend income, I ask
you to end the unfair double taxation of dividends.

Lower taxes and greater investment will help this economy expand. More
jobs mean more taxpayers - and higher revenues to our government. The
best way to address the deficit and move toward a balanced budget is to
encourage economic growth - and to show some spending discipline in
Washington, D.C. We must work together to fund only our most important
priorities. I will send you a budget that increases discretionary
spending by four percent next year - about as much as the average
family's income is expected to grow. And that is a good benchmark for
us: Federal spending should not rise any faster than the paychecks of
American families.

A growing economy, and a focus on essential priorities, will also be
crucial to the future of Social Security. As we continue to work
together to keep Social Security sound and reliable, we must offer
younger workers a chance to invest in retirement accounts that they will
control and they will own.

Our second goal is high quality, affordable health care for all
Americans.

The American system of medicine is a model of skill and innovation -
with a pace of discovery that is adding good years to our lives. Yet for
many people, medical care costs too much - and many have no coverage at
all. These problems will not be solved with a nationalized health care
system that dictates coverage and rations care. Instead, we must work
toward a system in which all Americans have a good insurance
policy...choose their own doctors..and seniors and low-income Americans
receive the help they need. Instead of bureaucrats, and trial lawyers,
and HMOs, we must put doctors, and nurses, and patients back in charge
of American medicine.

Health care reform must begin with Medicare, because Medicare is the
binding commitment of a caring society. We must renew that commitment by
giving seniors access to the preventive medicine and new drugs that are
transforming health care in America.

Seniors happy with the current Medicare system should be able to keep
their coverage just the way it is. And just like you, the members of
Congress, members of your staffs, and other federal employees, all
seniors should have the choice of a health care plan that provides
prescription drugs. My budget will commit an additional 400 billion
dollars over the next decade to reform and strengthen Medicare. Leaders
of both political parties have talked for years about strengthening
Medicare - I urge the members of this new Congress to act this year.

To improve our health care system, we must address one of the prime
causes of higher costs - the constant threat that physicians and
hospitals will be unfairly sued. Because of excessive litigation,
everybody pays more for health care - and many parts of America are
losing fine doctors. No one has ever been healed by a frivolous lawsuit
- and I urge the Congress to pass medical liability reform.

Our third goal is to promote energy independence for our country, while
dramatically improving the environment.

I have sent you a comprehensive energy plan to promote energy efficiency
and conservation, to develop cleaner technology, and to produce more
energy at home. I have sent you Clear Skies legislation that mandates a
70 percent cut in air pollution from power plants over the next 15
years. I have sent you a Healthy Forests Initiative, to help prevent the
catastrophic fires that devastate communities, kill wildlife, and burn
away millions of acres of treasured forest.

I urge you to pass these measures, for the good of both our environment
and our economy. Even more, I ask you to take a crucial step, and
protect our environment in ways that generations before us could not
have imagined. In this century, the greatest environmental progress will
come about, not through endless lawsuits or command and control
regulations, but through technology and innovation. Tonight I am
proposing 1.2 billion dollars in research funding so that America can
lead the world in developing clean, hydrogen-powered automobiles.

A simple chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen generates energy,
which can be used to power a car - producing only water, not exhaust
fumes. With a new national commitment, our scientists and engineers will
overcome obstacles to taking these cars from laboratory to showroom - so
that the first car driven by a child born today could be powered by
hydrogen, and pollution-free. Join me in this important innovation - to
make our air significantly cleaner, and our country much less dependent
on foreign sources of energy.

Our fourth goal is to apply the compassion of America to the deepest
problems of America. For so many in our country - the homeless, the
fatherless, the addicted - the need is great. Yet there is power -
wonder-working power - in the goodness, and idealism, and faith of the
American people.

Americans are doing the work of compassion every day - visiting
prisoners, providing shelter to battered women, bringing companionship
to lonely seniors. These good works deserve our praise...they deserve
our personal support...and, when appropriate, they deserve the
assistance of our government. I urge you to pass both my faith-based
initiative and the Citizen Service Act - to encourage acts of compassion
that can transform America, one heart and one soul at a time.

Last year, I called on my fellow citizens to participate in USA Freedom
Corps, which is enlisting tens of thousands of new volunteers across
America. Tonight I ask Congress and the American people to focus the
spirit of service and the resources of government on the needs of some
of our most vulnerable citizens - boys and girls trying to grow up
without guidance and attention...and children who have to go through a
prison gate to be hugged by their mom or dad. I propose a 450 million
dollar initiative to bring mentors to more than a million disadvantaged
junior high students and children of prisoners. Government will support
the training and recruiting of mentors, yet it is the men and women of
America who will fill the need. One mentor, one person, can change a
life forever - and I urge you to be that one person.

Another cause of hopelessness is addiction to drugs. Addiction crowds
out friendship, ambition, moral conviction, and reduces all the richness
of life to a single destructive desire. As a government, we are fighting
illegal drugs by cutting off supplies, and reducing demand through
anti-drug education programs. Yet for those already addicted, the fight
against drugs is a fight for their own lives.

Too many Americans in search of treatment cannot get it. So tonight I
propose a new 600 million dollar program to help an additional 300,000
Americans receive treatment over the next three years.

Our Nation is blessed with recovery programs that do amazing work. One
of them is found at the Healing Place Church in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
A man in the program said, "God does miracles in people .s lives, and
you never think it could be you." Tonight, let us bring to all Americans
who struggle with drug addiction this message of hope: The miracle of
recovery is possible, and it could be you.

By caring for children who need mentors, and for addicted men and women
who need treatment, we are building a more welcoming society - a culture
that values every life. And in this work we must not overlook the
weakest among us. I ask you to protect infants at the very hour of
birth, and end the practice of partial-birth abortion. And because no
human life should be started or ended as the object of an experiment, I
ask you to set a high standard for humanity and pass a law against all
human cloning.

The qualities of courage and compassion that we strive for in America
also determine our conduct abroad. The American flag stands for more
than our power and our interests. Our Founders dedicated this country to
the cause of human dignity - the rights of every person and the
possibilities of every life. This conviction leads us into the world to
help the afflicted, and defend the peace, and confound the designs of
evil men. In Afghanistan, we helped to liberate an oppressed
people...and we will continue helping them secure their country, rebuild
their society, and educate all their children - boys and girls. In the
Middle East, we will continue to seek peace between a secure Israel and
a democratic Palestine. Across the earth, America is feeding the hungry;
more than 60 percent of international food aid comes as a gift from the
people of the United States.

As our Nation moves troops and builds alliances to make our world safer,
we must also remember our calling, as a blessed country, to make this
world better. Today, on the continent of Africa, nearly 30 million
people have the AIDS virus - including three million children under the
age of 15. There are whole countries in Africa where more than one-third
of the adult population carries the infection. More than four million
require immediate drug treatment. Yet across that continent, only 50,000
AIDS victims - only 50,000 - are receiving the medicine they need.

Because the AIDS diagnosis is considered a death sentence, many do not
seek treatment. Almost all who do are turned away. A doctor in rural
South Africa describes his frustration. He says, "We have no
medicines..many hospitals tell [people], 'You've got AIDS. We can't help
you. Go home and die.' "

In an age of miraculous medicines, no person should have to hear those
words. AIDS can be prevented. Anti-retroviral drugs can extend life for
many years. And the cost of those drugs has dropped from 12,000 dollars
a year to under 300 dollars a year - which places a tremendous
possibility within our grasp.

Ladies and gentlemen, seldom has history offered a greater opportunity
to do so much for so many. We have confronted, and will continue to
confront, HIV/AIDS in our own country. And to meet a severe and urgent
crisis abroad, tonight I propose the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief - a
work of mercy beyond all current international efforts to help the
people of Africa. This comprehensive plan will prevent seven million new
AIDS infections...treat at least two million people with life-extending
drugs...and provide humane care for millions of people suffering from
AIDS, and for children orphaned by AIDS. I ask the Congress to commit 15
billion dollars over the next five years, including nearly ten billion
dollars in new money, to turn the tide against AIDS in the most
afflicted nations of Africa and the Caribbean.

This Nation can lead the world in sparing innocent people from a plague
of nature. And this Nation is leading the world in confronting and
defeating the man-made evil of international terrorism.

There are days when the American people do not hear news about the war
on terror. There is never a day when I do not learn of another threat,
or receive reports of operations in progress, or give an order in this
global war against a scattered network of killers. The war goes on, and
we are winning.

To date we have arrested, or otherwise dealt with, many key commanders
of al-Qaida. They include a man who directed logistics and funding for
the September 11th attacks...the chief of al-Qaida operations in the
Persian Gulf who planned the bombings of our embassies in East Africa
and the USS Cole...an al-Qaida operations chief from Southeast Asia...a
former director of al-Qaida's training camps in Afghanistan...a key
al-Qaida operative in Europe..and a major al-Qaida leader in Yemen. All
told, more than 3,000 suspected terrorists have been arrested in many
countries. And many others have met a different fate. They are no longer
a problem for the United States and our friends and allies.

We are working closely with other nations to prevent further attacks.
America and coalition countries have uncovered and stopped terrorist
conspiracies targeting the American embassy in Yemen...the American
embassy in Singapore...a Saudi military base...and ships in the straits
of Hormuz, and the straits of Gibraltar. We have broken al-Qaida cells
in Hamburg, and Milan, and Madrid, and London, and Paris - as well as
Buffalo, New York.

We have the terrorists on the run, and we are keeping them on the run.
One by one, the terrorists are learning the meaning of American justice.

As we fight this war, we will remember where it began - here, in our own
country. This government is taking unprecedented measures to protect our
people and defend our homeland. We have intensified security at the
borders and ports of entry...posted more than 50,000 newly trained
federal screeners in airports...begun inoculating troops and first
responders against smallpox...and are deploying the Nation's first early
warning network of sensors to detect biological attack. And this year,
for the first time, we are beginning to field a defense to protect this
Nation against ballistic missiles.

I thank the Congress for supporting these measures. I ask you tonight to
add to our future security with a major research and production effort
to guard our people against bio-terrorism, called Project Bioshield. The
budget I send you will propose almost six billion dollars to quickly
make available effective vaccines and treatments against agents like
anthrax, botulinum toxin, Ebola, and plague. We must assume that our
enemies would use these diseases as weapons, and we must act before the
dangers are upon us.

Since September 11th, our intelligence and law enforcement agencies have
worked more closely than ever to track and disrupt the terrorists. The
FBI is improving its ability to analyze intelligence, and transforming
itself to meet new threats. And tonight, I am instructing the leaders of
the FBI, Central Intelligence, Homeland Security, and the Department of
Defense to develop a Terrorist Threat Integration Center, to merge and
analyze all threat information in a single location. Our government must
have the very best information possible, and we will use it to make sure
the right people are in the right places to protect our citizens.

Our war against terror is a contest of will, in which perseverance is
power. In the ruins of two towers, at the western wall of the Pentagon,
on a field in Pennsylvania, this Nation made a pledge, and we renew that
pledge tonight: Whatever the duration of this struggle, and whatever the
difficulties, we will not permit the triumph of violence in the affairs
of men...free people will set the course of history.

Today, the gravest danger in the war on terror...the gravest danger
facing America and the world...is outlaw regimes that seek and possess
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons. These regimes could use such
weapons for blackmail, terror, and mass murder. They could also give or
sell those weapons to their terrorist allies, who would use them without
the least hesitation.

This threat is new; America's duty is familiar. Throughout the 20th
century, small groups of men seized control of great nations...built
armies and arsenals..and set out to dominate the weak and intimidate the
world. In each case, their ambitions of cruelty and murder had no limit.
In each case, the ambitions of Hitlerism, militarism, and communism were
defeated by the will of free peoples, by the strength of great
alliances, and by the might of the United States of America. Now, in
this century, the ideology of power and domination has appeared again,
and seeks to gain the ultimate weapons of terror. Once again, this
Nation and our friends are all that stand between a world at peace, and
a world of chaos and constant alarm. Once again, we are called to defend
the safety of our people, and the hopes of all mankind. And we accept
this responsibility.

America is making a broad and determined effort to confront these
dangers. We have called on the United Nations to fulfill its charter,
and stand by its demand that Iraq disarm. We are strongly supporting the
International Atomic Energy Agency in its mission to track and control
nuclear materials around the world. We are working with other
governments to secure nuclear materials in the former Soviet Union, and
to strengthen global treaties banning the production and shipment of
missile technologies and weapons of mass destruction.

In all of these efforts, however, America's purpose is more than to
follow a process - it is to achieve a result: the end of terrible
threats to the civilized world. All free nations have a stake in
preventing sudden and catastrophic attack. We are asking them to join
us, and many are doing so. Yet the course of this Nation does not depend
on the decisions of others. Whatever action is required, whenever action
is necessary, I will defend the freedom and security of the American
people.

Different threats require different strategies. In Iran, we continue to
see a government that represses its people, pursues weapons of mass
destruction, and supports terror. We also see Iranian citizens risking
intimidation and death as they speak out for liberty, human rights, and
democracy. Iranians, like all people, have a right to choose their own
government, and determine their own destiny - and the United States
supports their aspirations to live in freedom.

On the Korean peninsula, an oppressive regime rules a people living in
fear and starvation. Throughout the 1990s, the United States relied on a
negotiated framework to keep North Korea from gaining nuclear weapons.
We now know that the regime was deceiving the world, and developing
those weapons all along. And today the North Korean regime is using its
nuclear program to incite fear and seek concessions. America and the
world will not be blackmailed. America is working with the countries of
the region - South Korea, Japan, China, and Russia - to find a peaceful
solution, and to show the North Korean government that nuclear weapons
will bring only isolation, economic stagnation, and continued hardship.
The North Korean regime will find respect in the world, and revival for
its people, only when it turns away from its nuclear ambitions.

Our Nation and the world must learn the lessons of the Korean peninsula,
and not allow an even greater threat to rise up in Iraq. A brutal
dictator, with a history of reckless aggression..with ties to
terrorism... with great potential wealth...will not be permitted to
dominate a vital region and threaten the United States.

Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein faced the prospect of being the last
casualty in a war he had started and lost. To spare himself, he agreed
to disarm of all weapons of mass destruction. For the next 12 years, he
systematically violated that agreement. He pursued chemical, biological,
and nuclear weapons even while inspectors were in his country. Nothing
to date has restrained him from his pursuit of these weapons - not
economic sanctions, not isolation from the civilized world, not even
cruise missile strikes on his military facilities. Almost three months
ago, the United Nations Security Council gave Saddam Hussein his final
chance to disarm. He has shown instead his utter contempt for the United
Nations, and for the opinion of the world.

The 108 UN weapons inspectors were not sent to conduct a scavenger hunt
for hidden materials across a country the size of California. The job of
the inspectors is to verify that Iraq's regime is disarming. It is up to
Iraq to show exactly where it is hiding its banned weapons...lay those
weapons out for the world to see...and destroy them as directed. Nothing
like this has happened.

The United Nations concluded in 1999 that Saddam Hussein had biological
weapons materials sufficient to produce over 25,000 liters of anthrax -
enough doses to kill several million people. He has not accounted for
that material. He has given no evidence that he has destroyed it.

The United Nations concluded that Saddam Hussein had materials
sufficient to produce more than 38,000 liters of botulinum toxin -
enough to subject millions of people to death by respiratory failure. He
has not accounted for that material. He has given no evidence that he
has destroyed it.

Our intelligence officials estimate that Saddam Hussein had the
materials to produce as much as 500 tons of sarin, mustard, and VX nerve
agent. In such quantities, these chemical agents also could kill untold
thousands. He has not accounted for these materials. He has given no
evidence that he has destroyed them.

U.S. intelligence indicates that Saddam Hussein had upwards of 30,000
munitions capable of delivering chemical agents. Inspectors recently
turned up 16 of them, despite Iraq's recent declaration denying their
existence. Saddam Hussein has not accounted for the remaining 29,984 of
these prohibited munitions. He has given no evidence that he has
destroyed them.

From three Iraqi defectors we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s, had
several mobile biological weapons labs. These are designed to produce
germ warfare agents, and can be moved from place to place to evade
inspectors. Saddam Hussein has not disclosed these facilities. He has
given no evidence that he has destroyed them.

The International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed in the 1990s that
Saddam Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development program, had
a design for a nuclear weapon, and was working on five different methods
of enriching uranium for a bomb. The British government has learned that
Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from
Africa. Our intelligence sources tell us that he has attempted to
purchase high strength aluminum tubes suitable for nuclear weapons
production. Saddam Hussein has not credibly explained these activities.
He clearly has much to hide.

The dictator of Iraq is not disarming. To the contrary, he is deceiving.
From intelligence sources, we know, for instance, that thousands of
Iraqi security personnel are at work hiding documents and materials from
the UN inspectors - sanitizing inspection sites, and monitoring the
inspectors themselves. Iraqi officials accompany the inspectors in order
to intimidate witnesses. Iraq is blocking U-2 surveillance flights
requested by the United Nations. Iraqi intelligence officers are posing
as the scientists inspectors are supposed to interview. Real scientists
have been coached by Iraqi officials on what to say. And intelligence
sources indicate that Saddam Hussein has ordered that scientists who
cooperate with UN inspectors in disarming Iraq will be killed, along
with their families.

Year after year, Saddam Hussein has gone to elaborate lengths, spent
enormous sums, taken great risks, to build and keep weapons of mass
destruction - but why? The only possible explanation, the only possible
use he could have for those weapons, is to dominate, intimidate, or
attack. With nuclear arms or a full arsenal of chemical and biological
weapons, Saddam Hussein could resume his ambitions of conquest in the
Middle East, and create deadly havoc in the region. And this Congress
and the American people must recognize another threat. Evidence from
intelligence sources, secret communications, and statements by people
now in custody, reveal that Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists,
including members of al-Qaida. Secretly, and without fingerprints, he
could provide one of his hidden weapons to terrorists, or help them
develop their own.

Before September 11, 2001, many in the world believed that Saddam
Hussein could be contained. But chemical agents and lethal viruses and
shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained. Imagine those 19
hijackers with other weapons, and other plans - this time armed by
Saddam Hussein. It would take just one vial, one canister, one crate
slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none we have
ever known. We will do everything in our power to make sure that day
never comes.

Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent. Since when
have terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions, politely putting
us on notice before they strike? If this threat is permitted to fully
and suddenly emerge, all actions, all words, and all recriminations
would come too late. Trusting in the sanity and restraint of Saddam
Hussein is not a strategy, and it is not an option.

This dictator, who is assembling the world's most dangerous weapons, has
already used them on whole villages - leaving thousands of his own
citizens dead, blind, or disfigured. Iraqi refugees tell us how forced
confessions are obtained - by torturing children while their parents are
made to watch. International human rights groups have catalogued other
methods used in the torture chambers of Iraq: electric shock, burning
with hot irons, dripping acid on the skin, mutilation with electric
drills, cutting out tongues, and rape.

If this is not evil, then evil has no meaning. And tonight I have a
message for the brave and oppressed people of Iraq: Your enemy is not
surrounding your country - your enemy is ruling your country. And the
day he and his regime are removed from power will be the day of your
liberation.

The world has waited 12 years for Iraq to disarm. America will not
accept a serious and mounting threat to our country, our friends, and
our allies. The United States will ask the UN Security Council to
convene on February 5th to consider the facts of Iraq's ongoing defiance
of the world. Secretary of State Powell will present information and
intelligence about Iraq's illegal weapons programs; its attempts to hide
those weapons from inspectors; and its links to terrorist groups. We
will consult, but let there be no misunderstanding: If Saddam Hussein
does not fully disarm, for the safety of our people, and for the peace
of the world, we will lead a coalition to disarm him.

Tonight I also have a message for the men and women who will keep the
peace, members of the American Armed Forces: Many of you are assembling
in and near the Middle East, and some crucial hours may lie ahead. In
those hours, the success of our cause will depend on you. Your training
has prepared you. Your honor will guide you. You believe in America, and
America believes in you.

Sending Americans into battle is the most profound decision a president
can make. The technologies of war have changed. The risks and suffering
of war have not. For the brave Americans who bear the risk, no victory
is free from sorrow. This Nation fights reluctantly, because we know the
cost, and we dread the days of mourning that always come.

We seek peace. We strive for peace. And sometimes peace must be
defended. A future lived at the mercy of terrible threats is no peace at
all. If war is forced upon us, we will fight in a just cause and by just
means - sparing, in every way we can, the innocent. And if war is forced
upon us, we will fight with the full force and might of the United
States military - and we will prevail. And as we and our coalition
partners are doing in Afghanistan, we will bring to the Iraqi people
food, and medicines, and supplies...and freedom.

Many challenges, abroad and at home, have arrived in a single season. In
two years, America has gone from a sense of invulnerability to an
awareness of peril...from bitter division in small matters to calm unity
in great causes. And we go forward with confidence, because this call of
history has come to the right country.

Americans are a resolute people, who have risen to every test of our
time. Adversity has revealed the character of our country, to the world,
and to ourselves.

America is a strong Nation, and honorable in the use of our strength. We
exercise power without conquest, and sacrifice for the liberty of
strangers.


Americans are a free people, who know that freedom is the right of every
person and the future of every nation. The liberty we prize is not
America's gift to the world, it is God;s gift to humanity.

We Americans have faith in ourselves - but not in ourselves alone. We do
not claim to know all the ways of Providence, yet we can trust in them,
placing our confidence in the loving God behind all of life, and all of
history.

May He guide us now, and may God continue to bless the United States of
America.

Thank you.

***

State of the Union Address
George W. Bush
January 20, 2004

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress, distinguished
guests, and fellow citizens: America this evening is a nation called to
great responsibilities. And we are rising to meet them.

As we gather tonight, hundreds of thousands of American servicemen and
women are deployed across the world in the war on terror. By bringing
hope to the oppressed, and delivering justice to the violent, they are
making America more secure. (Applause.)

Each day, law enforcement personnel and intelligence officers are
tracking terrorist threats; analysts are examining airline passenger
lists; the men and women of our new Homeland Security Department are
patrolling our coasts and borders. And their vigilance is protecting
America. (Applause.)

Americans are proving once again to be the hardest working people in the
world. The American economy is growing stronger. The tax relief you
passed is working. (Applause.)

Tonight, members of Congress can take pride in the great works of
compassion and reform that skeptics had thought impossible. You're
raising the standards for our public schools, and you are giving our
senior citizens prescription drug coverage under Medicare. (Applause.)

We have faced serious challenges together, and now we face a choice: We
can go forward with confidence and resolve, or we can turn back to the
dangerous illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes
are no threat to us. We can press on with economic growth, and reforms
in education and Medicare, or we can turn back to old policies and old
divisions.

We've not come all this way -- through tragedy, and trial and war --
only to falter and leave our work unfinished. Americans are rising to
the tasks of history, and they expect the same from us. In their
efforts, their enterprise, and their character, the American people are
showing that the state of our union is confident and strong. (Applause.)

Our greatest responsibility is the active defense of the American
people. Twenty-eight months have passed since September 11th, 2001 --
over two years without an attack on American soil. And it is tempting to
believe that the danger is behind us. That hope is understandable,
comforting -- and false. The killing has continued in Bali, Jakarta,
Casablanca, Riyadh, Mombasa, Jerusalem, Istanbul, and Baghdad. The
terrorists continue to plot against America and the civilized world. And
by our will and courage, this danger will be defeated. (Applause.)

Inside the United States, where the war began, we must continue to give
our homeland security and law enforcement personnel every tool they need
to defend us. And one of those essential tools is the Patriot Act, which
allows federal law enforcement to better share information, to track
terrorists, to disrupt their cells, and to seize their assets. For
years, we have used similar provisions to catch embezzlers and drug
traffickers. If these methods are good for hunting criminals, they are
even more important for hunting terrorists. (Applause.)

Key provisions of the Patriot Act are set to expire next year.
(Applause.) The terrorist threat will not expire on that schedule.
(Applause.) Our law enforcement needs this vital legislation to protect
our citizens. You need to renew the Patriot Act. (Applause.)

America is on the offensive against the terrorists who started this war.
Last March, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a mastermind of September the 11th,
awoke to find himself in the custody of U.S. and Pakistani authorities.
Last August the 11th brought the capture of the terrorist Hambali, who
was a key player in the attack in Indonesia that killed over 200 people.
We're tracking al Qaeda around the world, and nearly two-thirds of their
known leaders have now been captured or killed. Thousands of very
skilled and determined military personnel are on the manhunt, going
after the remaining killers who hide in cities and caves, and one by
one, we will bring these terrorists to justice. (Applause.)

As part of the offensive against terror, we are also confronting the
regimes that harbor and support terrorists, and could supply them with
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons. The United States and our
allies are determined: We refuse to live in the shadow of this ultimate
danger. (Applause.)

The first to see our determination were the Taliban, who made
Afghanistan the primary training base of al Qaeda killers. As of this
month, that country has a new constitution, guaranteeing free elections
and full participation by women. Businesses are opening, health care
centers are being established, and the boys and girls of Afghanistan are
back in school. With the help from the new Afghan army, our coalition is
leading aggressive raids against the surviving members of the Taliban
and al Qaeda. The men and women of Afghanistan are building a nation
that is free and proud and fighting terror -- and America is honored to
be their friend. (Applause.)

Since we last met in this chamber, combat forces of the United States,
Great Britain, Australia, Poland and other countries enforced the
demands of the United Nations, ended the rule of Saddam Hussein, and the
people of Iraq are free. (Applause.)

Having broken the Baathist regime, we face a remnant of violent Saddam
supporters. Men who ran away from our troops in battle are now dispersed
and attack from the shadows. These killers, joined by foreign
terrorists, are a serious, continuing danger. Yet we're making progress
against them. The once all-powerful ruler of Iraq was found in a hole,
and now sits in a prison cell. (Applause.) Of the top 55 officials of
the former regime, we have captured or killed 45. Our forces are on the
offensive, leading over 1,600 patrols a day and conducting an average of
180 raids a week. We are dealing with these thugs in Iraq, just as
surely as we dealt with Saddam Hussein's evil regime. (Applause.)

The work of building a new Iraq is hard, and it is right. And America
has always been willing to do what it takes for what is right. Last
January, Iraq's only law was the whim of one brutal man. Today our
coalition is working with the Iraqi Governing Council to draft a basic
law, with a bill of rights. We're working with Iraqis and the United
Nations to prepare for a transition to full Iraqi sovereignty by the end
of June.

As democracy takes hold in Iraq, the enemies of freedom will do all in
their power to spread violence and fear. They are trying to shake the
will of our country and our friends, but the United States of America
will never be intimidated by thugs and assassins. (Applause.) The
killers will fail, and the Iraqi people will live in freedom.
(Applause.)

Month by month, Iraqis are assuming more responsibility for their own
security and their own future. And tonight we are honored to welcome one
of Iraq's most respected leaders: the current President of the Iraqi
Governing Council, Adnan Pachachi.

Sir, America stands with you and the Iraqi people as you build a free
and peaceful nation. (Applause.)

Because of American leadership and resolve, the world is changing for
the better. Last month, the leader of Libya voluntarily pledged to
disclose and dismantle all of his regime's weapons of mass destruction
programs, including a uranium enrichment project for nuclear weapons.
Colonel Qadhafi correctly judged that his country would be better off
and far more secure without weapons of mass murder. (Applause.)

Nine months of intense negotiations involving the United States and
Great Britain succeeded with Libya, while 12 years of diplomacy with
Iraq did not. And one reason is clear: For diplomacy to be effective,
words must be credible, and no one can now doubt the word of America.
(Applause.)

Different threats require different strategies. Along with nations in
the region, we're insisting that North Korea eliminate its nuclear
program. America and the international community are demanding that Iran
meet its commitments and not develop nuclear weapons. America is
committed to keeping the world's most dangerous weapons out of the hands
of the most dangerous regimes. (Applause.)

When I came to this rostrum on September the 20th, 2001, I brought the
police shield of a fallen officer, my reminder of lives that ended, and
a task that does not end. I gave to you and to all Americans my complete
commitment to securing our country and defeating our enemies. And this
pledge, given by one, has been kept by many.

You in the Congress have provided the resources for our defense, and
cast the difficult votes of war and peace. Our closest allies have been
unwavering. America's intelligence personnel and diplomats have been
skilled and tireless. And the men and women of the American military --
they have taken the hardest duty. We've seen their skill and their
courage in armored charges and midnight raids, and lonely hours on
faithful watch. We have seen the joy when they return, and felt the
sorrow when one is lost. I've had the honor of meeting our servicemen
and women at many posts, from the deck of a carrier in the Pacific to a
mess hall in Baghdad.

Many of our troops are listening tonight. And I want you and your
families to know: America is proud of you. And my administration, and
this Congress, will give you the resources you need to fight and win the
war on terror. (Applause.)

I know that some people question if America is really in a war at all.
They view terrorism more as a crime, a problem to be solved mainly with
law enforcement and indictments. After the World Trade Center was first
attacked in 1993, some of the guilty were indicted and tried and
convicted, and sent to prison. But the matter was not settled. The
terrorists were still training and plotting in other nations, and
drawing up more ambitious plans. After the chaos and carnage of
September the 11th, it is not enough to serve our enemies with legal
papers. The terrorists and their supporters declared war on the United
States, and war is what they got. (Applause.)

Some in this chamber, and in our country, did not support the liberation
of Iraq. Objections to war often come from principled motives. But let
us be candid about the consequences of leaving Saddam Hussein in power.
We're seeking all the facts. Already, the Kay Report identified dozens
of weapons of mass destruction-related program activities and
significant amounts of equipment that Iraq concealed from the United
Nations. Had we failed to act, the dictatator's weapons of mass
destruction programs would continue to this day. Had we failed to act,
Security Council resolutions on Iraq would have been revealed as empty
threats, weakening the United Nations and encouraging defiance by
dictators around the world. Iraq's torture chambers would still be
filled with victims, terrified and innocent. The killing fields of Iraq
-- where hundreds of thousands of men and women and children vanished
into the sands -- would still be known only to the killers. For all who
love freedom and peace, the world without Saddam Hussein's regime is a
better and safer place. (Applause.)

Some critics have said our duties in Iraq must be internationalized.
This particular criticism is hard to explain to our partners in Britain,
Australia, Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, Thailand, Italy, Spain,
Poland, Denmark, Hungary, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Romania, the Netherlands --
(applause) -- Norway, El Salvador, and the 17 other countries that have
committed troops to Iraq. (Applause.) As we debate at home, we must
never ignore the vital contributions of our international partners, or
dismiss their sacrifices.

From the beginning, America has sought international support for our
operations in Afghanistan and Iraq, and we have gained much support.
There is a difference, however, between leading a coalition of many
nations, and submitting to the objections of a few. America will never
seek a permission slip to defend the security of our country.
(Applause.)

We also hear doubts that democracy is a realistic goal for the greater
Middle East, where freedom is rare. Yet it is mistaken, and
condescending, to assume that whole cultures and great religions are
incompatible with liberty and self-government. I believe that God has
planted in every human heart the desire to live in freedom. And even
when that desire is crushed by tyranny for decades, it will rise again.
(Applause.)

As long as the Middle East remains a place of tyranny and despair and
anger, it will continue to produce men and movements that threaten the
safety of America and our friends. So America is pursuing a forward
strategy of freedom in the greater Middle East. We will challenge the
enemies of reform, confront the allies of terror, and expect a higher
standard from our friend. To cut through the barriers of hateful
propaganda, the Voice of America and other broadcast services are
expanding their programming in Arabic and Persian -- and soon, a new
television service will begin providing reliable news and information
across the region. I will send you a proposal to double the budget of
the National Endowment for Democracy, and to focus its new work on the
development of free elections, and free markets, free press, and free
labor unions in the Middle East. And above all, we will finish the
historic work of democracy in Afghanistan and Iraq, so those nations can
light the way for others, and help transform a troubled part of the
world. (Applause.)

America is a nation with a mission, and that mission comes from our most
basic beliefs. We have no desire to dominate, no ambitions of empire.
Our aim is a democratic peace -- a peace founded upon the dignity and
rights of every man and woman. America acts in this cause with friends
and allies at our side, yet we understand our special calling: This
great republic will lead the cause of freedom. (Applause.)

In the last three years, adversity has also revealed the fundamental
strengths of the American economy. We have come through recession, and
terrorist attack, and corporate scandals, and the uncertainties of war.
And because you acted to stimulate our economy with tax relief, this
economy is strong, and growing stronger. (Applause.)

You have doubled the child tax credit from $500 to $1,000, reduced the
marriage penalty, begun to phase out the death tax, reduced taxes on
capital gains and stock dividends, cut taxes on small businesses, and
you have lowered taxes for every American who pays income taxes.

Americans took those dollars and put them to work, driving this economy
forward. The pace of economic growth in the third quarter of 2003 was
the fastest in nearly 20 years; new home construction, the highest in
almost 20 years; home ownership rates, the highest ever. Manufacturing
activity is increasing. Inflation is low. Interest rates are low.
Exports are growing. Productivity is high, and jobs are on the rise.
(Applause.)

These numbers confirm that the American people are using their money far
better than government would have -- and you were right to return it.
(Applause.)

America's growing economy is also a changing economy. As technology
transforms the way almost every job is done, America becomes more
productive, and workers need new skills. Much of our job growth will be
found in high-skilled fields like health care and biotechnology. So we
must respond by helping more Americans gain the skills to find good jobs
in our new economy.

All skills begin with the basics of reading and math, which are supposed
to be learned in the early grades of our schools. Yet for too long, for
too many children, those skills were never mastered. By passing the No
Child Left Behind Act, you have made the expectation of literacy the law
of our country. We're providing more funding for our schools -- a
36-percent increase since 2001. We're requiring higher standards. We are
regularly testing every child on the fundamentals. We are reporting
results to parents, and making sure they have better options when
schools are not performing. We are making progress toward excellence for
every child in America. (Applause.)

But the status quo always has defenders. Some want to undermine the No
Child Left Behind Act by weakening standards and accountability. Yet the
results we require are really a matter of common sense: We expect third
graders to read and do math at the third grade level -- and that's not
asking too much. Testing is the only way to identify and help students
who are falling behind. This nation will not go back to the days of
simply shuffling children along from grade to grade without them
learning the basics. I refuse to give up on any child -- and the No
Child Left Behind Act is opening the door of opportunity to all of
America's children. (Applause.)

At the same time, we must ensure that older students and adults can gain
the skills they need to find work now. Many of the fastest growing
occupations require strong math and science preparation, and training
beyond the high school level. So tonight, I propose a series of measures
called Jobs for the 21st Century. This program will provide extra help
to middle and high school students who fall behind in reading and math,
expand advanced placement programs in low-income schools, invite math
and science professionals from the private sector to teach part-time in
our high schools. I propose larger Pell grants for students who prepare
for college with demanding courses in high school. (Applause.) I propose
increasing our support for America's fine community colleges, so they
can -- (applause.) I do so, so they can train workers for industries
that are creating the most new jobs. By all these actions, we'll help
more and more Americans to join in the growing prosperity of our
country. Job training is important, and so is job creation.

We must continue to pursue an aggressive, pro-growth economic agenda.
(Applause.) Congress has some unfinished business on the issue of taxes.
The tax reductions you passed are set to expire. Unless you act --
(applause) -- unless you act -- unless you act, the unfair tax on
marriage will go back up. Unless you act, millions of families will be
charged $300 more in federal taxes for every child. Unless you act,
small businesses will pay higher taxes. Unless you act, the death tax
will eventually come back to life. Unless you act, Americans face a tax
increase. What Congress has given, the Congress should not take away.
For the sake of job growth, the tax cuts you passed should be permanent.
(Applause.)

Our agenda for jobs and growth must help small business owners and
employees with relief from needless federal regulation, and protect them
from junk and frivolous lawsuits. (Applause.)

Consumers and businesses need reliable supplies of energy to make our
economy run -- so I urge you to pass legislation to modernize our
electricity system, promote conservation, and make America less
dependent on foreign sources of energy. (Applause.)

My administration is promoting free and fair trade to open up new
markets for America's entrepreneurs and manufacturers and farmers -- to
create jobs for American workers. Younger workers should have the
opportunity to build a nest egg by saving part of their Social Security
taxes in a personal retirement account. (Applause.) We should make the
Social Security system a source of ownership for the American people.
(Applause.) And we should limit the burden of government on this economy
by acting as good stewards of taxpayers' dollars. (Applause.)

In two weeks, I will send you a budget that funds the war, protects the
homeland, and meets important domestic needs, while limiting the growth
in discretionary spending to less than 4 percent. (Applause.) This will
require that Congress focus on priorities, cut wasteful spending, and be
wise with the people's money. By doing so, we can cut the deficit in
half over the next five years. (Applause.)

Tonight, I also ask you to reform our immigration laws so they reflect
our values and benefit our economy. I propose a new temporary worker
program to match willing foreign workers with willing employers when no
Americans can be found to fill the job. This reform will be good for our
economy because employers will find needed workers in an honest and
orderly system. A temporary worker program will help protect our
homeland, allowing Border Patrol and law enforcement to focus on true
threats to our national security.

I oppose amnesty, because it would encourage further illegal
immigration, and unfairly reward those who break our laws. My temporary
worker program will preserve the citizenship path for those who respect
the law, while bringing millions of hardworking men and women out from
the shadows of American life. (Applause.)

Our nation's health care system, like our economy, is also in a time of
change. Amazing medical technologies are improving and saving lives.
This dramatic progress has brought its own challenge, in the rising
costs of medical care and health insurance. Members of Congress, we must
work together to help control those costs and extend the benefits of
modern medicine throughout our country. (Applause.)

Meeting these goals requires bipartisan effort, and two months ago, you
showed the way. By strengthening Medicare and adding a prescription drug
benefit, you kept a basic commitment to our seniors: You are giving them
the modern medicine they deserve. (Applause.)

Starting this year, under the law you passed, seniors can choose to
receive a drug discount card, saving them 10 to 25 percent off the
retail price of most prescription drugs -- and millions of low-income
seniors can get an additional $600 to buy medicine. Beginning next year,
seniors will have new coverage for preventive screenings against
diabetes and heart disease, and seniors just entering Medicare can
receive wellness exams.

In January of 2006, seniors can get prescription drug coverage under
Medicare. For a monthly premium of about $35, most seniors who do not
have that coverage today can expect to see their drug bills cut roughly
in half. Under this reform, senior citizens will be able to keep their
Medicare just as it is, or they can choose a Medicare plan that fits
them best -- just as you, as members of Congress, can choose an
insurance plan that meets your needs. And starting this year, millions
of Americans will be able to save money tax-free for their medical
expenses in a health savings account. (Applause.)

I signed this measure proudly, and any attempt to limit the choices of
our seniors, or to take away their prescription drug coverage under
Medicare, will meet my veto. (Applause.)

On the critical issue of health care, our goal is to ensure that
Americans can choose and afford private health care coverage that best
fits their individual needs. To make insurance more affordable, Congress
must act to address rapidly rising health care costs. Small businesses
should be able to band together and negotiate for lower insurance rates,
so they can cover more workers with health insurance. I urge you to pass
association health plans. (Applause.) I ask you to give lower-income
Americans a refundable tax credit that would allow millions to buy their
own basic health insurance. (Applause.)

By computerizing health records, we can avoid dangerous medical
mistakes, reduce costs, and improve care. To protect the doctor-patient
relationship, and keep good doctors doing good work, we must eliminate
wasteful and frivolous medical lawsuits. (Applause.) And tonight I
propose that individuals who buy catastrophic health care coverage, as
part of our new health savings accounts, be allowed to deduct 100
percent of the premiums from their taxes. (Applause.)

A government-run health care system is the wrong prescription.
(Applause.) By keeping costs under control, expanding access, and
helping more Americans afford coverage, we will preserve the system of
private medicine that makes America's health care the best in the world.
(Applause.)

We are living in a time of great change -- in our world, in our economy,
in science and medicine. Yet some things endure -- courage and
compassion, reverence and integrity, respect for differences of faith
and race. The values we try to live by never change. And they are
instilled in us by fundamental institutions, such as families and
schools and religious congregations. These institutions, these unseen
pillars of civilization, must remain strong in America, and we will
defend them. We must stand with our families to help them raise healthy,
responsible children. When it comes to helping children make right
choices, there is work for all of us to do.

One of the worst decisions our children can make is to gamble their
lives and futures on drugs. Our government is helping parents confront
this problem with aggressive education, treatment, and law enforcement.
Drug use in high school has declined by 11 percent over the last two
years. Four hundred thousand fewer young people are using illegal drugs
than in the year 2001. (Applause.) In my budget, I proposed new funding
to continue our aggressive, community-based strategy to reduce demand
for illegal drugs. Drug testing in our schools has proven to be an
effective part of this effort. So tonight I proposed an additional $23
million for schools that want to use drug testing as a tool to save
children's lives. The aim here is not to punish children, but to send
them this message: We love you, and we don't want to lose you.
(Applause.)

To help children make right choices, they need good examples. Athletics
play such an important role in our society, but, unfortunately, some in
professional sports are not setting much of an example. The use of
performance-enhancing drugs like steroids in baseball, football, and
other sports is dangerous, and it sends the wrong message -- that there
are shortcuts to accomplishment, and that performance is more important
than character. So tonight I call on team owners, union representatives,
coaches, and players to take the lead, to send the right signal, to get
tough, and to get rid of steroids now. (Applause.)

To encourage right choices, we must be willing to confront the dangers
young people face -- even when they're difficult to talk about. Each
year, about 3 million teenagers contract sexually-transmitted diseases
that can harm them, or kill them, or prevent them from ever becoming
parents. In my budget, I propose a grassroots campaign to help inform
families about these medical risks. We will double federal funding for
abstinence programs, so schools can teach this fact of life: Abstinence
for young people is the only certain way to avoid sexually-transmitted
diseases. (Applause.)

Decisions children now make can affect their health and character for
the rest of their lives. All of us -- parents and schools and government
-- must work together to counter the negative influence of the culture,
and to send the right messages to our children.

A strong America must also value the institution of marriage. I believe
we should respect individuals as we take a principled stand for one of
the most fundamental, enduring institutions of our civilization.
Congress has already taken a stand on this issue by passing the Defense
of Marriage Act, signed in 1996 by President Clinton. That statute
protects marriage under federal law as a union of a man and a woman, and
declares that one state may not redefine marriage for other states.

Activist judges, however, have begun redefining marriage by court order,
without regard for the will of the people and their elected
representatives. On an issue of such great consequence, the people's
voice must be heard. If judges insist on forcing their arbitrary will
upon the people, the only alternative left to the people would be the
constitutional process. Our nation must defend the sanctity of marriage.
(Applause.)

The outcome of this debate is important -- and so is the way we conduct
it. The same moral tradition that defines marriage also teaches that
each individual has dignity and value in God's sight. (Applause.)

It's also important to strengthen our communities by unleashing the
compassion of America's religious institutions. Religious charities of
every creed are doing some of the most vital work in our country --
mentoring children, feeding the hungry, taking the hand of the lonely.
Yet government has often denied social service grants and contracts to
these groups, just because they have a cross or a Star of David or a
crescent on the wall. By executive order, I have opened billions of
dollars in grant money to competition that includes faith-based
charities. Tonight I ask you to codify this into law, so people of faith
can know that the law will never discriminate against them again.
(Applause.)

In the past, we've worked together to bring mentors to children of
prisoners, and provide treatment for the addicted, and help for the
homeless. Tonight I ask you to consider another group of Americans in
need of help. This year, some 600,000 inmates will be released from
prison back into society. We know from long experience that if they
can't find work, or a home, or help, they are much more likely to commit
crime and return to prison. So tonight, I propose a four-year, $300
million prisoner re-entry initiative to expand job training and
placement services, to provide transitional housing, and to help newly
released prisoners get mentoring, including from faith-based groups.
(Applause.) America is the land of second chance, and when the gates of
the prison open, the path ahead should lead to a better life.
(Applause.)

For all Americans, the last three years have brought tests we did not
ask for, and achievements shared by all. By our actions, we have shown
what kind of nation we are. In grief, we have found the grace to go on.
In challenge, we rediscovered the courage and daring of a free people.
In victory, we have shown the noble aims and good heart of America. And
having come this far, we sense that we live in a time set apart.

I've been witness to the character of the people of America, who have
shown calm in times of danger, compassion for one another, and toughness
for the long haul. All of us have been partners in a great enterprise.
And even some of the youngest understand that we are living in historic
times. Last month a girl in Lincoln, Rhode Island, sent me a letter. It
began, "Dear George W. Bush. If there's anything you know, I, Ashley
Pearson, age 10, can do to help anyone, please send me a letter and tell
me what I can do to save our country." She added this P.S.: "If you can
send a letter to the troops, please put, 'Ashley Pearson believes in
you.'" (Applause.)

Tonight, Ashley, your message to our troops has just been conveyed. And,
yes, you have some duties yourself. Study hard in school, listen to your
mom or dad, help someone in need, and when you and your friends see a
man or woman in uniform, say, "thank you." (Applause.) And, Ashley,
while you do your part, all of us here in this great chamber will do our
best to keep you and the rest of America safe and free. (Applause.)

My fellow citizens, we now move forward, with confidence and faith. Our
nation is strong and steadfast. The cause we serve is right, because it
is the cause of all mankind. The momentum of freedom in our world is
unmistakable -- and it is not carried forward by our power alone. We can
trust in that greater power who guides the unfolding of the years. And
in all that is to come, we can know that His purposes are just and true.

May God continue to bless America. (Applause.)

***

State of the Union Address
George W. Bush
February 2, 2005

Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress, fellow
citizens:

As a new Congress gathers, all of us in the elected branches of
government share a great privilege: We've been placed in office by the
votes of the people we serve. And tonight that is a privilege we share
with newly-elected leaders of Afghanistan, the Palestinian Territories,
Ukraine, and a free and sovereign Iraq. (Applause.)

Two weeks ago, I stood on the steps of this Capitol and renewed the
commitment of our nation to the guiding ideal of liberty for all. This
evening I will set forth policies to advance that ideal at home and
around the world.

Tonight, with a healthy, growing economy, with more Americans going back
to work, with our nation an active force for good in the world -- the
state of our union is confident and strong. (Applause.)

Our generation has been blessed -- by the expansion of opportunity, by
advances in medicine, by the security purchased by our parents'
sacrifice. Now, as we see a little gray in the mirror -- or a lot of
gray -- (laughter) -- and we watch our children moving into adulthood,
we ask the question: What will be the state of their union? Members of
Congress, the choices we make together will answer that question. Over
the next several months, on issue after issue, let us do what Americans
have always done, and build a better world for our children and our
grandchildren. (Applause.)

First, we must be good stewards of this economy, and renew the great
institutions on which millions of our fellow citizens rely. America's
economy is the fastest growing of any major industrialized nation. In
the past four years, we provided tax relief to every person who pays
income taxes, overcome a recession, opened up new markets abroad,
prosecuted corporate criminals, raised homeownership to its highest
level in history, and in the last year alone, the United States has
added 2.3 million new jobs. (Applause.) When action was needed, the
Congress delivered -- and the nation is grateful.

Now we must add to these achievements. By making our economy more
flexible, more innovative, and more competitive, we will keep America
the economic leader of the world. (Applause.)

America's prosperity requires restraining the spending appetite of the
federal government. I welcome the bipartisan enthusiasm for spending
discipline. I will send you a budget that holds the growth of
discretionary spending below inflation, makes tax relief permanent, and
stays on track to cut the deficit in half by 2009. (Applause.) My budget
substantially reduces or eliminates more than 150 government programs
that are not getting results, or duplicate current efforts, or do not
fulfill essential priorities. The principle here is clear: Taxpayer
dollars must be spent wisely, or not at all. (Applause.)

To make our economy stronger and more dynamic, we must prepare a rising
generation to fill the jobs of the 21st century. Under the No Child Left
Behind Act, standards are higher, test scores are on the rise, and we're
closing the achievement gap for minority students. Now we must demand
better results from our high schools, so every high school diploma is a
ticket to success. We will help an additional 200,000 workers to get
training for a better career, by reforming our job training system and
strengthening America's community colleges. And we'll make it easier for
Americans to afford a college education, by increasing the size of Pell
Grants. (Applause.)

To make our economy stronger and more competitive, America must reward,
not punish, the efforts and dreams of entrepreneurs. Small business is
the path of advancement, especially for women and minorities, so we must
free small businesses from needless regulation and protect honest
job-creators from junk lawsuits. (Applause.) Justice is distorted, and
our economy is held back by irresponsible class-actions and frivolous
asbestos claims -- and I urge Congress to pass legal reforms this year.
(Applause.)

To make our economy stronger and more productive, we must make health
care more affordable, and give families greater access to good coverage
-- (applause) -- and more control over their health decisions.
(Applause.) I ask Congress to move forward on a comprehensive health
care agenda with tax credits to help low-income workers buy insurance, a
community health center in every poor country, improved information
technology to prevent medical error and needless costs, association
health plans for small businesses and their employees -- (applause) --
expanded health savings accounts -- (applause) -- and medical liability
reform that will reduce health care costs and make sure patients have
the doctors and care they need. (Applause.)

To keep our economy growing, we also need reliable supplies of
affordable, environmentally responsible energy. (Applause.) Nearly four
years ago, I submitted a comprehensive energy strategy that encourages
conservation, alternative sources, a modernized electricity grid, and
more production here at home -- including safe, clean nuclear energy.
(Applause.) My Clear Skies legislation will cut power plant pollution
and improve the health of our citizens. (Applause.) And my budget
provides strong funding for leading-edge technology -- from
hydrogen-fueled cars, to clean coal, to renewable sources such as
ethanol. (Applause.) Four years of debate is enough: I urge Congress to
pass legislation that makes America more secure and less dependent on
foreign energy. (Applause.)

All these proposals are essential to expand this economy and add new
jobs -- but they are just the beginning of our duty. To build the
prosperity of future generations, we must update institutions that were
created to meet the needs of an earlier time. Year after year, Americans
are burdened by an archaic, incoherent federal tax code. I've appointed
a bipartisan panel to examine the tax code from top to bottom. And when
their recommendations are delivered, you and I will work together to
give this nation a tax code that is pro-growth, easy to understand, and
fair to all. (Applause.)

America's immigration system is also outdated -- unsuited to the needs
of our economy and to the values of our country. We should not be
content with laws that punish hardworking people who want only to
provide for their families, and deny businesses willing workers, and
invite chaos at our border. It is time for an immigration policy that
permits temporary guest workers to fill jobs Americans will not take,
that rejects amnesty, that tells us who is entering and leaving our
country, and that closes the border to drug dealers and terrorists.
(Applause.)

One of America's most important institutions -- a symbol of the trust
between generations -- is also in need of wise and effective reform.
Social Security was a great moral success of the 20th century, and we
must honor its great purposes in this new century. (Applause.) The
system, however, on its current path, is headed toward bankruptcy. And
so we must join together to strengthen and save Social Security.
(Applause.)

Today, more than 45 million Americans receive Social Security benefits,
and millions more are nearing retirement -- and for them the system is
sound and fiscally strong. I have a message for every American who is 55
or older: Do not let anyone mislead you; for you, the Social Security
system will not change in any way. (Applause.) For younger workers, the
Social Security system has serious problems that will grow worse with
time. Social Security was created decades ago, for a very different era.
In those days, people did not live as long. Benefits were much lower
than they are today. And a half-century ago, about sixteen workers paid
into the system for each person drawing benefits.

Our society has changed in ways the founders of Social Security could
not have foreseen. In today's world, people are living longer and,
therefore, drawing benefits longer. And those benefits are scheduled to
rise dramatically over the next few decades. And instead of sixteen
workers paying in for every beneficiary, right now it's only about three
workers. And over the next few decades that number will fall to just two
workers per beneficiary. With each passing year, fewer workers are
paying ever-higher benefits to an ever-larger number of retirees.

So here is the result: Thirteen years from now, in 2018, Social Security
will be paying out more than it takes in. And every year afterward will
bring a new shortfall, bigger than the year before. For example, in the
year 2027, the government will somehow have to come up with an extra
$200 billion to keep the system afloat -- and by 2033, the annual
shortfall would be more than $300 billion. By the year 2042, the entire
system would be exhausted and bankrupt. If steps are not taken to avert
that outcome, the only solutions would be dramatically higher taxes,
massive new borrowing, or sudden and severe cuts in Social Security
benefits or other government programs.

I recognize that 2018 and 2042 may seem a long way off. But those dates
are not so distant, as any parent will tell you. If you have a
five-year-old, you're already concerned about how you'll pay for college
tuition 13 years down the road. If you've got children in their 20s, as
some of us do, the idea of Social Security collapsing before they retire
does not seem like a small matter. And it should not be a small matter
to the United States Congress. (Applause.) You and I share a
responsibility. We must pass reforms that solve the financial problems
of Social Security once and for all.

Fixing Social Security permanently will require an open, candid review
of the options. Some have suggested limiting benefits for wealthy
retirees. Former Congressman Tim Penny has raised the possibility of
indexing benefits to prices rather than wages. During the 1990s, my
predecessor, President Clinton, spoke of increasing the retirement age.
Former Senator John Breaux suggested discouraging early collection of
Social Security benefits. The late Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan
recommended changing the way benefits are calculated. All these ideas
are on the table.

I know that none of these reforms would be easy. But we have to move
ahead with courage and honesty, because our children's retirement
security is more important than partisan politics. (Applause.) I will
work with members of Congress to find the most effective combination of
reforms. I will listen to anyone who has a good idea to offer.
(Applause.) We must, however, be guided by some basic principles. We
must make Social Security permanently sound, not leave that task for
another day. We must not jeopardize our economic strength by increasing
payroll taxes. We must ensure that lower-income Americans get the help
they need to have dignity and peace of mind in their retirement. We must
guarantee there is no change for those now retired or nearing
retirement. And we must take care that any changes in the system are
gradual, so younger workers have years to prepare and plan for their
future.

As we fix Social Security, we also have the responsibility to make the
system a better deal for younger workers. And the best way to reach that
goal is through voluntary personal retirement accounts. (Applause.) Here
is how the idea works. Right now, a set portion of the money you earn is
taken out of your paycheck to pay for the Social Security benefits of
today's retirees. If you're a younger worker, I believe you should be
able to set aside part of that money in your own retirement account, so
you can build a nest egg for your own future.

Here's why the personal accounts are a better deal. Your money will
grow, over time, at a greater rate than anything the current system can
deliver -- and your account will provide money for retirement over and
above the check you will receive from Social Security. In addition,
you'll be able to pass along the money that accumulates in your personal
account, if you wish, to your children and -- or grandchildren. And best
of all, the money in the account is yours, and the government can never
take it away. (Applause.)

The goal here is greater security in retirement, so we will set careful
guidelines for personal accounts. We'll make sure the money can only go
into a conservative mix of bonds and stock funds. We'll make sure that
your earnings are not eaten up by hidden Wall Street fees. We'll make
sure there are good options to protect your investments from sudden
market swings on the eve of your retirement. We'll make sure a personal
account cannot be emptied out all at once, but rather paid out over
time, as an addition to traditional Social Security benefits. And we'll
make sure this plan is fiscally responsible, by starting personal
retirement accounts gradually, and raising the yearly limits on
contributions over time, eventually permitting all workers to set aside
four percentage points of their payroll taxes in their accounts.

Personal retirement accounts should be familiar to federal employees,
because you already have something similar, called the Thrift Savings
Plan, which lets workers deposit a portion of their paychecks into any
of five different broadly-based investment funds. It's time to extend
the same security, and choice, and ownership to young Americans.
(Applause.)

Our second great responsibility to our children and grandchildren is to
honor and to pass along the values that sustain a free society. So many
of my generation, after a long journey, have come home to family and
faith, and are determined to bring up responsible, moral children.
Government is not the source of these values, but government should
never undermine them.

Because marriage is a sacred institution and the foundation of society,
it should not be re-defined by activist judges. For the good of
families, children, and society, I support a constitutional amendment to
protect the institution of marriage. (Applause.)

Because a society is measured by how it treats the weak and vulnerable,
we must strive to build a culture of life. Medical research can help us
reach that goal, by developing treatments and cures that save lives and
help people overcome disabilities -- and I thank the Congress for
doubling the funding of the National Institutes of Health. (Applause.)
To build a culture of life, we must also ensure that scientific advances
always serve human dignity, not take advantage of some lives for the
benefit of others. We should all be able to agree -- (applause) -- we
should all be able to agree on some clear standards. I will work with
Congress to ensure that human embryos are not created for
experimentation or grown for body parts, and that human life is never
bought and sold as a commodity. (Applause.) America will continue to
lead the world in medical research that is ambitious, aggressive, and
always ethical.

Because courts must always deliver impartial justice, judges have a duty
to faithfully interpret the law, not legislate from the bench.
(Applause.) As President, I have a constitutional responsibility to
nominate men and women who understand the role of courts in our
democracy, and are well-qualified to serve on the bench -- and I have
done so. (Applause.) The Constitution also gives the Senate a
responsibility: Every judicial nominee deserves an up or down vote.
(Applause.)

Because one of the deepest values of our country is compassion, we must
never turn away from any citizen who feels isolated from the
opportunities of America. Our government will continue to support
faith-based and community groups that bring hope to harsh places. Now we
need to focus on giving young people, especially young men in our
cities, better options than apathy, or gangs, or jail. Tonight I propose
a three-year initiative to help organizations keep young people out of
gangs, and show young men an ideal of manhood that respects women and
rejects violence. (Applause.) Taking on gang life will be one part of a
broader outreach to at-risk youth, which involves parents and pastors,
coaches and community leaders, in programs ranging from literacy to
sports. And I am proud that the leader of this nationwide effort will be
our First Lady, Laura Bush. (Applause.)

Because HIV/AIDS brings suffering and fear into so many lives, I ask you
to reauthorize the Ryan White Act to encourage prevention, and provide
care and treatment to the victims of that disease. (Applause.) And as we
update this important law, we must focus our efforts on fellow citizens
with the highest rates of new cases, African American men and women.
(Applause.)

Because one of the main sources of our national unity is our belief in
equal justice, we need to make sure Americans of all races and
backgrounds have confidence in the system that provides justice. In
America we must make doubly sure no person is held to account for a
crime he or she did not commit -- so we are dramatically expanding the
use of DNA evidence to prevent wrongful conviction. (Applause.) Soon I
will send to Congress a proposal to fund special training for defense
counsel in capital cases, because people on trial for their lives must
have competent lawyers by their side. (Applause.)

Our third responsibility to future generations is to leave them an
America that is safe from danger, and protected by peace. We will pass
along to our children all the freedoms we enjoy -- and chief among them
is freedom from fear.

In the three and a half years since September the 11th, 2001, we have
taken unprecedented actions to protect Americans. We've created a new
department of government to defend our homeland, focused the FBI on
preventing terrorism, begun to reform our intelligence agencies, broken
up terror cells across the country, expanded research on defenses
against biological and chemical attack, improved border security, and
trained more than a half-million first responders. Police and
firefighters, air marshals, researchers, and so many others are working
every day to make our homeland safer, and we thank them all. (Applause.)

Our nation, working with allies and friends, has also confronted the
enemy abroad, with measures that are determined, successful, and
continuing. The al Qaeda terror network that attacked our country still
has leaders -- but many of its top commanders have been removed. There
are still governments that sponsor and harbor terrorists -- but their
number has declined. There are still regimes seeking weapons of mass
destruction -- but no longer without attention and without consequence.
Our country is still the target of terrorists who want to kill many, and
intimidate us all -- and we will stay on the offensive against them,
until the fight is won. (Applause.)

Pursuing our enemies is a vital commitment of the war on terror -- and I
thank the Congress for providing our servicemen and women with the
resources they have needed. During this time of war, we must continue to
support our military and give them the tools for victory. (Applause.)

Other nations around the globe have stood with us. In Afghanistan, an
international force is helping provide security. In Iraq, 28 countries
have troops on the ground, the United Nations and the European Union
provided technical assistance for the elections, and NATO is leading a
mission to help train Iraqi officers. We're cooperating with 60
governments in the Proliferation Security Initiative, to detect and stop
the transit of dangerous materials. We're working closely with the
governments in Asia to convince North Korea to abandon its nuclear
ambitions. Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and nine other countries have
captured or detained al Qaeda terrorists. In the next four years, my
administration will continue to build the coalitions that will defeat
the dangers of our time. (Applause.)

In the long-term, the peace we seek will only be achieved by eliminating
the conditions that feed radicalism and ideologies of murder. If whole
regions of the world remain in despair and grow in hatred, they will be
the recruiting grounds for terror, and that terror will stalk America
and other free nations for decades. The only force powerful enough to
stop the rise of tyranny and terror, and replace hatred with hope, is
the force of human freedom. (Applause.) Our enemies know this, and that
is why the terrorist Zarqawi recently declared war on what he called the
"evil principle" of democracy. And we've declared our own intention:
America will stand with the allies of freedom to support democratic
movements in the Middle East and beyond, with the ultimate goal of
ending tyranny in our world. (Applause.)

The United States has no right, no desire, and no intention to impose
our form of government on anyone else. That is one of the main
differences between us and our enemies. They seek to impose and expand
an empire of oppression, in which a tiny group of brutal, self-appointed
rulers control every aspect of every life. Our aim is to build and
preserve a community of free and independent nations, with governments
that answer to their citizens, and reflect their own cultures. And
because democracies respect their own people and their neighbors, the
advance of freedom will lead to peace. (Applause.)

That advance has great momentum in our time -- shown by women voting in
Afghanistan, and Palestinians choosing a new direction, and the people
of Ukraine asserting their democratic rights and electing a president.
We are witnessing landmark events in the history of liberty. And in the
coming years, we will add to that story. (Applause.)

The beginnings of reform and democracy in the Palestinian territories
are now showing the power of freedom to break old patterns of violence
and failure. Tomorrow morning, Secretary of State Rice departs on a trip
that will take her to Israel and the West Bank for meetings with Prime
Minister Sharon and President Abbas. She will discuss with them how we
and our friends can help the Palestinian people end terror and build the
institutions of a peaceful, independent, democratic state. To promote
this democracy, I will ask Congress for $350 million to support
Palestinian political, economic, and security reforms. The goal of two
democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace,
is within reach -- and America will help them achieve that goal.
(Applause.)

To promote peace and stability in the broader Middle East, the United
States will work with our friends in the region to fight the common
threat of terror, while we encourage a higher standard of freedom.
Hopeful reform is already taking hold in an arc from Morocco to Jordan
to Bahrain. The government of Saudi Arabia can demonstrate its
leadership in the region by expanding the role of its people in
determining their future. And the great and proud nation of Egypt, which
showed the way toward peace in the Middle East, can now show the way
toward democracy in the Middle East. (Applause.)

To promote peace in the broader Middle East, we must confront regimes
that continue to harbor terrorists and pursue weapons of mass murder.
Syria still allows its territory, and parts of Lebanon, to be used by
terrorists who seek to destroy every chance of peace in the region. You
have passed, and we are applying, the Syrian Accountability Act -- and
we expect the Syrian government to end all support for terror and open
the door to freedom. (Applause.) Today, Iran remains the world's primary
state sponsor of terror -- pursuing nuclear weapons while depriving its
people of the freedom they seek and deserve. We are working with
European allies to make clear to the Iranian regime that it must give up
its uranium enrichment program and any plutonium reprocessing, and end
its support for terror. And to the Iranian people, I say tonight: As you
stand for your own liberty, America stands with you. (Applause.)

Our generational commitment to the advance of freedom, especially in the
Middle East, is now being tested and honored in Iraq. That country is a
vital front in the war on terror, which is why the terrorists have
chosen to make a stand there. Our men and women in uniform are fighting
terrorists in Iraq, so we do not have to face them here at home.
(Applause.) And the victory of freedom in Iraq will strengthen a new
ally in the war on terror, inspire democratic reformers from Damascus to
Tehran, bring more hope and progress to a troubled region, and thereby
lift a terrible threat from the lives of our children and grandchildren.

We will succeed because the Iraqi people value their own liberty -- as
they showed the world last Sunday. (Applause.) Across Iraq, often at
great risk, millions of citizens went to the polls and elected 275 men
and women to represent them in a new Transitional National Assembly. A
young woman in Baghdad told of waking to the sound of mortar fire on
election day, and wondering if it might be too dangerous to vote. She
said, "Hearing those explosions, it occurred to me -- the insurgents are
weak, they are afraid of democracy, they are losing. So I got my
husband, and I got my parents, and we all came out and voted together."

Americans recognize that spirit of liberty, because we share it. In any
nation, casting your vote is an act of civic responsibility; for
millions of Iraqis, it was also an act of personal courage, and they
have earned the respect of us all. (Applause.)

One of Iraq's leading democracy and human rights advocates is Safia
Taleb al-Suhail. She says of her country, "We were occupied for 35 years
by Saddam Hussein. That was the real occupation. Thank you to the
American people who paid the cost, but most of all, to the soldiers."
Eleven years ago, Safia's father was assassinated by Saddam's
intelligence service. Three days ago in Baghdad, Safia was finally able
to vote for the leaders of her country -- and we are honored that she is
with us tonight. (Applause.)

The terrorists and insurgents are violently opposed to democracy, and
will continue to attack it. Yet, the terrorists' most powerful myth is
being destroyed. The whole world is seeing that the car bombers and
assassins are not only fighting coalition forces, they are trying to
destroy the hopes of Iraqis, expressed in free elections. And the whole
world now knows that a small group of extremists will not overturn the
will of the Iraqi people. (Applause.)

We will succeed in Iraq because Iraqis are determined to fight for their
own freedom, and to write their own history. As Prime Minister Allawi
said in his speech to Congress last September, "Ordinary Iraqis are
anxious to shoulder all the security burdens of our country as quickly
as possible." That is the natural desire of an independent nation, and
it is also the stated mission of our coalition in Iraq. The new
political situation in Iraq opens a new phase of our work in that
country.

At the recommendation of our commanders on the ground, and in
consultation with the Iraqi government, we will increasingly focus our
efforts on helping prepare more capable Iraqi security forces -- forces
with skilled officers and an effective command structure. As those
forces become more self-reliant and take on greater security
responsibilities, America and its coalition partners will increasingly
be in a supporting role. In the end, Iraqis must be able to defend their
own country -- and we will help that proud, new nation secure its
liberty.

Recently an Iraqi interpreter said to a reporter, "Tell America not to
abandon us." He and all Iraqis can be certain: While our military
strategy is adapting to circumstances, our commitment remains firm and
unchanging. We are standing for the freedom of our Iraqi friends, and
freedom in Iraq will make America safer for generations to come.
(Applause.) We will not set an artificial timetable for leaving Iraq,
because that would embolden the terrorists and make them believe they
can wait us out. We are in Iraq to achieve a result: A country that is
democratic, representative of all its people, at peace with its
neighbors, and able to defend itself. And when that result is achieved,
our men and women serving in Iraq will return home with the honor they
have earned. (Applause.)

Right now, Americans in uniform are serving at posts across the world,
often taking great risks on my orders. We have given them training and
equipment; and they have given us an example of idealism and character
that makes every American proud. (Applause.) The volunteers of our
military are unrelenting in battle, unwavering in loyalty, unmatched in
honor and decency, and every day they're making our nation more secure.
Some of our servicemen and women have survived terrible injuries, and
this grateful country will do everything we can to help them recover.
(Applause.) And we have said farewell to some very good men and women,
who died for our freedom, and whose memory this nation will honor
forever.

One name we honor is Marine Corps Sergeant Byron Norwood of
Pflugerville, Texas, who was killed during the assault on Fallujah. His
mom, Janet, sent me a letter and told me how much Byron loved being a
Marine, and how proud he was to be on the front line against terror. She
wrote, "When Byron was home the last time, I said that I wanted to
protect him like I had since he was born. He just hugged me and said,
'You've done your job, Mom. Now it is my turn to protect you.'" Ladies
and gentlemen, with grateful hearts, we honor freedom's defenders, and
our military families, represented here this evening by Sergeant
Norwood's mom and dad, Janet and Bill Norwood. (Applause.)

In these four years, Americans have seen the unfolding of large events.
We have known times of sorrow, and hours of uncertainty, and days of
victory. In all this history, even when we have disagreed, we have seen
threads of purpose that unite us. The attack on freedom in our world has
reaffirmed our confidence in freedom's power to change the world. We are
all part of a great venture: To extend the promise of freedom in our
country, to renew the values that sustain our liberty, and to spread the
peace that freedom brings.

As Franklin Roosevelt once reminded Americans, "Each age is a dream that
is dying, or one that is coming to birth." And we live in the country
where the biggest dreams are born. The abolition of slavery was only a
dream -- until it was fulfilled. The liberation of Europe from fascism
was only a dream -- until it was achieved. The fall of imperial
communism was only a dream -- until, one day, it was accomplished. Our
generation has dreams of its own, and we also go forward with
confidence. The road of Providence is uneven and unpredictable -- yet we
know where it leads: It leads to freedom.

Thank you, and may God bless America. (Applause.)

***

State of the Union Address
George W. Bush
January 31, 2006

Thank you all. Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress,
members of the Supreme Court and diplomatic corps, distinguished guests,
and fellow citizens: Today our nation lost a beloved, graceful,
courageous woman who called America to its founding ideals and carried
on a noble dream. Tonight we are comforted by the hope of a glad reunion
with the husband who was taken so long ago, and we are grateful for the
good life of Coretta Scott King. (Applause.)

Every time I'm invited to this rostrum, I'm humbled by the privilege,
and mindful of the history we've seen together. We have gathered under
this Capitol dome in moments of national mourning and national
achievement. We have served America through one of the most
consequential periods of our history -- and it has been my honor to
serve with you.

In a system of two parties, two chambers, and two elected branches,
there will always be differences and debate. But even tough debates can
be conducted in a civil tone, and our differences cannot be allowed to
harden into anger. To confront the great issues before us, we must act
in a spirit of goodwill and respect for one another -- and I will do my
part. Tonight the state of our Union is strong -- and together we will
make it stronger. (Applause.)

In this decisive year, you and I will make choices that determine both
the future and the character of our country. We will choose to act
confidently in pursuing the enemies of freedom -- or retreat from our
duties in the hope of an easier life. We will choose to build our
prosperity by leading the world economy -- or shut ourselves off from
trade and opportunity. In a complex and challenging time, the road of
isolationism and protectionism may seem broad and inviting -- yet it
ends in danger and decline. The only way to protect our people, the only
way to secure the peace, the only way to control our destiny is by our
leadership -- so the United States of America will continue to lead.
(Applause.)

Abroad, our nation is committed to an historic, long-term goal -- we
seek the end of tyranny in our world. Some dismiss that goal as
misguided idealism. In reality, the future security of America depends
on it. On September the 11th, 2001, we found that problems originating
in a failed and oppressive state 7,000 miles away could bring murder and
destruction to our country. Dictatorships shelter terrorists, and feed
resentment and radicalism, and seek weapons of mass destruction.
Democracies replace resentment with hope, respect the rights of their
citizens and their neighbors, and join the fight against terror. Every
step toward freedom in the world makes our country safer -- so we will
act boldly in freedom's cause. (Applause.)

Far from being a hopeless dream, the advance of freedom is the great
story of our time. In 1945, there were about two dozen lonely
democracies in the world. Today, there are 122. And we're writing a new
chapter in the story of self-government -- with women lining up to vote
in Afghanistan, and millions of Iraqis marking their liberty with purple
ink, and men and women from Lebanon to Egypt debating the rights of
individuals and the necessity of freedom. At the start of 2006, more
than half the people of our world live in democratic nations. And we do
not forget the other half -- in places like Syria and Burma, Zimbabwe,
North Korea, and Iran -- because the demands of justice, and the peace
of this world, require their freedom, as well. (Applause.)

No one can deny the success of freedom, but some men rage and fight
against it. And one of the main sources of reaction and opposition is
radical Islam -- the perversion by a few of a noble faith into an
ideology of terror and death. Terrorists like bin Laden are serious
about mass murder -- and all of us must take their declared intentions
seriously. They seek to impose a heartless system of totalitarian
control throughout the Middle East, and arm themselves with weapons of
mass murder.

Their aim is to seize power in Iraq, and use it as a safe haven to
launch attacks against America and the world. Lacking the military
strength to challenge us directly, the terrorists have chosen the weapon
of fear. When they murder children at a school in Beslan, or blow up
commuters in London, or behead a bound captive, the terrorists hope
these horrors will break our will, allowing the violent to inherit the
Earth. But they have miscalculated: We love our freedom, and we will
fight to keep it. (Applause.)

In a time of testing, we cannot find security by abandoning our
commitments and retreating within our borders. If we were to leave these
vicious attackers alone, they would not leave us alone. They would
simply move the battlefield to our own shores. There is no peace in
retreat. And there is no honor in retreat. By allowing radical Islam to
work its will -- by leaving an assaulted world to fend for itself -- we
would signal to all that we no longer believe in our own ideals, or even
in our own courage. But our enemies and our friends can be certain: The
United States will not retreat from the world, and we will never
surrender to evil. (Applause.)

America rejects the false comfort of isolationism. We are the nation
that saved liberty in Europe, and liberated death camps, and helped
raise up democracies, and faced down an evil empire. Once again, we
accept the call of history to deliver the oppressed and move this world
toward peace. We remain on the offensive against terror networks. We
have killed or captured many of their leaders -- and for the others,
their day will come.

We remain on the offensive in Afghanistan, where a fine President and a
National Assembly are fighting terror while building the institutions of
a new democracy. We're on the offensive in Iraq, with a clear plan for
victory. First, we're helping Iraqis build an inclusive government, so
that old resentments will be eased and the insurgency will be
marginalized.

Second, we're continuing reconstruction efforts, and helping the Iraqi
government to fight corruption and build a modern economy, so all Iraqis
can experience the benefits of freedom. And, third, we're striking
terrorist targets while we train Iraqi forces that are increasingly
capable of defeating the enemy. Iraqis are showing their courage every
day, and we are proud to be their allies in the cause of freedom.
(Applause.)

Our work in Iraq is difficult because our enemy is brutal. But that
brutality has not stopped the dramatic progress of a new democracy. In
less than three years, the nation has gone from dictatorship to
liberation, to sovereignty, to a constitution, to national elections. At
the same time, our coalition has been relentless in shutting off
terrorist infiltration, clearing out insurgent strongholds, and turning
over territory to Iraqi security forces. I am confident in our plan for
victory; I am confident in the will of the Iraqi people; I am confident
in the skill and spirit of our military. Fellow citizens, we are in this
fight to win, and we are winning. (Applause.)

The road of victory is the road that will take our troops home. As we
make progress on the ground, and Iraqi forces increasingly take the
lead, we should be able to further decrease our troop levels -- but
those decisions will be made by our military commanders, not by
politicians in Washington, D.C. (Applause.)

Our coalition has learned from our experience in Iraq. We've adjusted
our military tactics and changed our approach to reconstruction. Along
the way, we have benefitted from responsible criticism and counsel
offered by members of Congress of both parties. In the coming year, I
will continue to reach out and seek your good advice. Yet, there is a
difference between responsible criticism that aims for success, and
defeatism that refuses to acknowledge anything but failure. (Applause.)
Hindsight alone is not wisdom, and second-guessing is not a strategy.
(Applause.)

With so much in the balance, those of us in public office have a duty to
speak with candor. A sudden withdrawal of our forces from Iraq would
abandon our Iraqi allies to death and prison, would put men like bin
Laden and Zarqawi in charge of a strategic country, and show that a
pledge from America means little. Members of Congress, however we feel
about the decisions and debates of the past, our nation has only one
option: We must keep our word, defeat our enemies, and stand behind the
American military in this vital mission. (Applause.)

Our men and women in uniform are making sacrifices -- and showing a
sense of duty stronger than all fear. They know what it's like to fight
house to house in a maze of streets, to wear heavy gear in the desert
heat, to see a comrade killed by a roadside bomb. And those who know the
costs also know the stakes. Marine Staff Sergeant Dan Clay was killed
last month fighting in Fallujah. He left behind a letter to his family,
but his words could just as well be addressed to every American. Here is
what Dan wrote: "I know what honor is.   It has been an honor to protect
and serve all of you. I faced death with the secure knowledge that you
would not have to . Never falter! Don't hesitate to honor and support
those of us who have the honor of protecting that which is worth
protecting."

Staff Sergeant Dan Clay's wife, Lisa, and his mom and dad, Sara Jo and
Bud, are with us this evening. Welcome. (Applause.)

Our nation is grateful to the fallen, who live in the memory of our
country. We're grateful to all who volunteer to wear our nation's
uniform -- and as we honor our brave troops, let us never forget the
sacrifices of America's military families. (Applause.)

Our offensive against terror involves more than military action.
Ultimately, the only way to defeat the terrorists is to defeat their
dark vision of hatred and fear by offering the hopeful alternative of
political freedom and peaceful change. So the United States of America
supports democratic reform across the broader Middle East. Elections are
vital, but they are only the beginning. Raising up a democracy requires
the rule of law, and protection of minorities, and strong, accountable
institutions that last longer than a single vote.

The great people of Egypt have voted in a multi-party presidential
election -- and now their government should open paths of peaceful
opposition that will reduce the appeal of radicalism. The Palestinian
people have voted in elections. And now the leaders of Hamas must
recognize Israel, disarm, reject terrorism, and work for lasting peace.
(Applause.) Saudi Arabia has taken the first steps of reform -- now it
can offer its people a better future by pressing forward with those
efforts. Democracies in the Middle East will not look like our own,
because they will reflect the traditions of their own citizens. Yet
liberty is the future of every nation in the Middle East, because
liberty is the right and hope of all humanity. (Applause.)

The same is true of Iran, a nation now held hostage by a small clerical
elite that is isolating and repressing its people. The regime in that
country sponsors terrorists in the Palestinian territories and in
Lebanon -- and that must come to an end. (Applause.) The Iranian
government is defying the world with its nuclear ambitions, and the
nations of the world must not permit the Iranian regime to gain nuclear
weapons. (Applause.) America will continue to rally the world to
confront these threats.

Tonight, let me speak directly to the citizens of Iran: America respects
you, and we respect your country. We respect your right to choose your
own future and win your own freedom. And our nation hopes one day to be
the closest of friends with a free and democratic Iran. (Applause.)

To overcome dangers in our world, we must also take the offensive by
encouraging economic progress, and fighting disease, and spreading hope
in hopeless lands. Isolationism would not only tie our hands in fighting
enemies, it would keep us from helping our friends in desperate need. We
show compassion abroad because Americans believe in the God-given
dignity and worth of a villager with HIV/AIDS, or an infant with
malaria, or a refugee fleeing genocide, or a young girl sold into
slavery. We also show compassion abroad because regions overwhelmed by
poverty, corruption, and despair are sources of terrorism, and organized
crime, and human trafficking, and the drug trade.

In recent years, you and I have taken unprecedented action to fight AIDS
and malaria, expand the education of girls, and reward developing
nations that are moving forward with economic and political reform. For
people everywhere, the United States is a partner for a better life.
Short-changing these efforts would increase the suffering and chaos of
our world, undercut our long-term security, and dull the conscience of
our country. I urge members of Congress to serve the interests of
America by showing the compassion of America.

Our country must also remain on the offensive against terrorism here at
home. The enemy has not lost the desire or capability to attack us.
Fortunately, this nation has superb professionals in law enforcement,
intelligence, the military, and homeland security. These men and women
are dedicating their lives, protecting us all, and they deserve our
support and our thanks. (Applause.) They also deserve the same tools
they already use to fight drug trafficking and organized crime -- so I
ask you to reauthorize the Patriot Act. (Applause.)

It is said that prior to the attacks of September the 11th, our
government failed to connect the dots of the conspiracy. We now know
that two of the hijackers in the United States placed telephone calls to
al Qaeda operatives overseas. But we did not know about their plans
until it was too late. So to prevent another attack  - based on
authority given to me by the Constitution and by statute -- I have
authorized a terrorist surveillance program to aggressively pursue the
international communications of suspected al Qaeda operatives and
affiliates to and from America. Previous Presidents have used the same
constitutional authority I have, and federal courts have approved the
use of that authority. Appropriate members of Congress have been kept
informed. The terrorist surveillance program has helped prevent
terrorist attacks. It remains essential to the security of America. If
there are people inside our country who are talking with al Qaeda, we
want to know about it, because we will not sit back and wait to be hit
again. (Applause.)

In all these areas -- from the disruption of terror networks, to victory
in Iraq, to the spread of freedom and hope in troubled regions -- we
need the support of our friends and allies. To draw that support, we
must always be clear in our principles and willing to act. The only
alternative to American leadership is a dramatically more dangerous and
anxious world. Yet we also choose to lead because it is a privilege to
serve the values that gave us birth. American leaders -- from Roosevelt
to Truman to Kennedy to Reagan -- rejected isolation and retreat,
because they knew that America is always more secure when freedom is on
the march.

Our own generation is in a long war against a determined enemy -- a war
that will be fought by Presidents of both parties, who will need steady
bipartisan support from the Congress. And tonight I ask for yours.
Together, let us protect our country, support the men and women who
defend us, and lead this world toward freedom. (Applause.)

Here at home, America also has a great opportunity: We will build the
prosperity of our country by strengthening our economic leadership in
the world.


Our economy is healthy and vigorous, and growing faster than other major
industrialized nations. In the last two-and-a-half years, America has
created 4.6 million new jobs -- more than Japan and the European Union
combined. (Applause.) Even in the face of higher energy prices and
natural disasters, the American people have turned in an economic
performance that is the envy of the world.

The American economy is preeminent, but we cannot afford to be
complacent. In a dynamic world economy, we are seeing new competitors,
like China and India, and this creates uncertainty, which makes it
easier to feed people's fears. So we're seeing some old temptations
return. Protectionists want to escape competition, pretending that we
can keep our high standard of living while walling off our economy.
Others say that the government needs to take a larger role in directing
the economy, centralizing more power in Washington and increasing taxes.
We hear claims that immigrants are somehow bad for the economy -- even
though this economy could not function without them. (Applause.) All
these are forms of economic retreat, and they lead in the same direction
-- toward a stagnant and second-rate economy.


Tonight I will set out a better path: an agenda for a nation that
competes with confidence; an agenda that will raise standards of living
and generate new jobs. Americans should not fear our economic future,
because we intend to shape it.

Keeping America competitive begins with keeping our economy growing. And
our economy grows when Americans have more of their own money to spend,
save, and invest. In the last five years, the tax relief you passed has
left $880 billion in the hands of American workers, investors, small
businesses, and families -- and they have used it to help produce more
than four years of uninterrupted economic growth. (Applause.) Yet the
tax relief is set to expire in the next few years. If we do nothing,
American families will face a massive tax increase they do not expect
and will not welcome.

Because America needs more than a temporary expansion, we need more than
temporary tax relief. I urge the Congress to act responsibly, and make
the tax cuts permanent. (Applause.)

Keeping America competitive requires us to be good stewards of tax
dollars. Every year of my presidency, we've reduced the growth of
non-security discretionary spending, and last year you passed bills that
cut this spending. This year my budget will cut it again, and reduce or
eliminate more than 140 programs that are performing poorly or not
fulfilling essential priorities. By passing these reforms, we will save
the American taxpayer another $14 billion next year, and stay on track
to cut the deficit in half by 2009. (Applause.)

I am pleased that members of Congress are working on earmark reform,
because the federal budget has too many special interest projects.
(Applause.) And we can tackle this problem together, if you pass the
line-item veto. (Applause.)

We must also confront the larger challenge of mandatory spending, or
entitlements. This year, the first of about 78 million baby boomers turn
60, including two of my Dad's favorite people -- me and President
Clinton. (Laughter.) This milestone is more than a personal crisis --
(laughter) -- it is a national challenge. The retirement of the baby
boom generation will put unprecedented strains on the federal
government. By 2030, spending for Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid
alone will be almost 60 percent of the entire federal budget. And that
will present future Congresses with impossible choices -- staggering tax
increases, immense deficits, or deep cuts in every category of spending.

Congress did not act last year on my proposal to save Social Security --
(applause) -- yet the rising cost of entitlements is a problem that is
not going away. (Applause.) And every year we fail to act, the situation
gets worse.

So tonight, I ask you to join me in creating a commission to examine the
full impact of baby boom retirements on Social Security, Medicare, and
Medicaid. This commission should include members of Congress of both
parties, and offer bipartisan solutions. We need to put aside partisan
politics and work together and get this problem solved. (Applause.)

Keeping America competitive requires us to open more markets for all
that Americans make and grow. One out of every five factory jobs in
America is related to global trade, and we want people everywhere to buy
American. With open markets and a level playing field, no one can
out-produce or out-compete the American worker. (Applause.)

Keeping America competitive requires an immigration system that upholds
our laws, reflects our values, and serves the interests of our economy.
Our nation needs orderly and secure borders. (Applause.) To meet this
goal, we must have stronger immigration enforcement and border
protection. (Applause.) And we must have a rational, humane guest worker
program that rejects amnesty, allows temporary jobs for people who seek
them legally, and reduces smuggling and crime at the border. (Applause.)

Keeping America competitive requires affordable health care. (Applause.)
Our government has a responsibility to provide health care for the poor
and the elderly, and we are meeting that responsibility. (Applause.) For
all Americans -- for all Americans, we must confront the rising cost of
care, strengthen the doctor-patient relationship, and help people afford
the insurance coverage they need. (Applause.)

We will make wider use of electronic records and other health
information technology, to help control costs and reduce dangerous
medical errors. We will strengthen health savings accounts -- making
sure individuals and small business employees can buy insurance with the
same advantages that people working for big businesses now get.
(Applause.) We will do more to make this coverage portable, so workers
can switch jobs without having to worry about losing their health
insurance. (Applause.) And because lawsuits are driving many good
doctors out of practice -- leaving women in nearly 1,500 American
counties without a single OB/GYN -- I ask the Congress to pass medical
liability reform this year. (Applause.)

Keeping America competitive requires affordable energy. And here we have
a serious problem: America is addicted to oil, which is often imported
from unstable parts of the world. The best way to break this addiction
is through technology. Since 2001, we have spent nearly $10 billion to
develop cleaner, cheaper, and more reliable alternative energy sources
-- and we are on the threshold of incredible advances.

So tonight, I announce the Advanced Energy Initiative -- a 22-percent
increase in clean-energy research -- at the Department of Energy, to
push for breakthroughs in two vital areas. To change how we power our
homes and offices, we will invest more in zero-emission coal-fired
plants, revolutionary solar and wind technologies, and clean, safe
nuclear energy. (Applause.)

We must also change how we power our automobiles. We will increase our
research in better batteries for hybrid and electric cars, and in
pollution-free cars that run on hydrogen. We'll also fund additional
research in cutting-edge methods of producing ethanol, not just from
corn, but from wood chips and stalks, or switch grass. Our goal is to
make this new kind of ethanol practical and competitive within six
years. (Applause.)

Breakthroughs on this and other new technologies will help us reach
another great goal: to replace more than 75 percent of our oil imports
from the Middle East by 2025. (Applause.) By applying the talent and
technology of America, this country can dramatically improve our
environment, move beyond a petroleum-based economy, and make our
dependence on Middle Eastern oil a thing of the past. (Applause.)

And to keep America competitive, one commitment is necessary above all:
We must continue to lead the world in human talent and creativity. Our
greatest advantage in the world has always been our educated,
hardworking, ambitious people -- and we're going to keep that edge.
Tonight I announce an American Competitiveness Initiative, to encourage
innovation throughout our economy, and to give our nation's children a
firm grounding in math and science. (Applause.)

First, I propose to double the federal commitment to the most critical
basic research programs in the physical sciences over the next 10 years.
This funding will support the work of America's most creative minds as
they explore promising areas such as nanotechnology, supercomputing, and
alternative energy sources.

Second, I propose to make permanent the research and development tax
credit -- (applause) -- to encourage bolder private-sector initiatives
in technology. With more research in both the public and private
sectors, we will improve our quality of life -- and ensure that America
will lead the world in opportunity and innovation for decades to come.
(Applause.)

Third, we need to encourage children to take more math and science, and
to make sure those courses are rigorous enough to compete with other
nations. We've made a good start in the early grades with the No Child
Left Behind Act, which is raising standards and lifting test scores
across our country. Tonight I propose to train 70,000 high school
teachers to lead advanced-placement courses in math and science, bring
30,000 math and science professionals to teach in classrooms, and give
early help to students who struggle with math, so they have a better
chance at good, high-wage jobs. If we ensure that America's children
succeed in life, they will ensure that America succeeds in the world.
(Applause.)

Preparing our nation to compete in the world is a goal that all of us
can share. I urge you to support the American Competitiveness
Initiative, and together we will show the world what the American people
can achieve.

America is a great force for freedom and prosperity. Yet our greatness
is not measured in power or luxuries, but by who we are and how we treat
one another. So we strive to be a compassionate, decent, hopeful
society.

In recent years, America has become a more hopeful nation. Violent crime
rates have fallen to their lowest levels since the 1970s. Welfare cases
have dropped by more than half over the past decade. Drug use among
youth is down 19 percent since 2001. There are fewer abortions in
America than at any point in the last three decades, and the number of
children born to teenage mothers has been falling for a dozen years in a
row. (Applause.)

These gains are evidence of a quiet transformation -- a revolution of
conscience, in which a rising generation is finding that a life of
personal responsibility is a life of fulfillment. Government has played
a role. Wise policies, such as welfare reform and drug education and
support for abstinence and adoption have made a difference in the
character of our country. And everyone here tonight, Democrat and
Republican, has a right to be proud of this record. (Applause.)

Yet many Americans, especially parents, still have deep concerns about
the direction of our culture, and the health of our most basic
institutions. They're concerned about unethical conduct by public
officials, and discouraged by activist courts that try to redefine
marriage. They worry about children in our society who need direction
and love, and about fellow citizens still displaced by natural disaster,
and about suffering caused by treatable diseases.

As we look at these challenges, we must never give in to the belief that
America is in decline, or that our culture is doomed to unravel. The
American people know better than that. We have proven the pessimists
wrong before -- and we will do it again. (Applause.)

A hopeful society depends on courts that deliver equal justice under the
law. The Supreme Court now has two superb new members -- new members on
its bench: Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Sam Alito. (Applause.)
I thank the Senate for confirming both of them. I will continue to
nominate men and women who understand that judges must be servants of
the law, and not legislate from the bench. (Applause.)

Today marks the official retirement of a very special American. For 24
years of faithful service to our nation, the United States is grateful
to Justice Sandra Day O'Connor. (Applause.)

A hopeful society has institutions of science and medicine that do not
cut ethical corners, and that recognize the matchless value of every
life. Tonight I ask you to pass legislation to prohibit the most
egregious abuses of medical research: human cloning in all its forms,
creating or implanting embryos for experiments, creating human-animal
hybrids, and buying, selling, or patenting human embryos. Human life is
a gift from our Creator -- and that gift should never be discarded,
devalued or put up for sale. (Applause.)

A hopeful society expects elected officials to uphold the public trust.
(Applause.) Honorable people in both parties are working on reforms to
strengthen the ethical standards of Washington -- I support your
efforts. Each of us has made a pledge to be worthy of public
responsibility -- and that is a pledge we must never forget, never
dismiss, and never betray. (Applause.)

As we renew the promise of our institutions, let us also show the
character of America in our compassion and care for one another.

A hopeful society gives special attention to children who lack direction
and love. Through the Helping America's Youth Initiative, we are
encouraging caring adults to get involved in the life of a child -- and
this good work is being led by our First Lady, Laura Bush. (Applause.)
This year we will add resources to encourage young people to stay in
school, so more of America's youth can raise their sights and achieve
their dreams.

A hopeful society comes to the aid of fellow citizens in times of
suffering and emergency -- and stays at it until they're back on their
feet. So far the federal government has committed $85 billion to the
people of the Gulf Coast and New Orleans. We're removing debris and
repairing highways and rebuilding stronger levees. We're providing
business loans and housing assistance. Yet as we meet these immediate
needs, we must also address deeper challenges that existed before the
storm arrived.

In New Orleans and in other places, many of our fellow citizens have
felt excluded from the promise of our country. The answer is not only
temporary relief, but schools that teach every child, and job skills
that bring upward mobility, and more opportunities to own a home and
start a business. As we recover from a disaster, let us also work for
the day when all Americans are protected by justice, equal in hope, and
rich in opportunity. (Applause.)

A hopeful society acts boldly to fight diseases like HIV/AIDS, which can
be prevented, and treated, and defeated. More than a million Americans
live with HIV, and half of all AIDS cases occur among African Americans.
I ask Congress to reform and reauthorize the Ryan White Act, and provide
new funding to states, so we end the waiting lists for AIDS medicines in
America. (Applause.) We will also lead a nationwide effort, working
closely with African American churches and faith-based groups, to
deliver rapid HIV tests to millions, end the stigma of AIDS, and come
closer to the day when there are no new infections in America.
(Applause.)

Fellow citizens, we've been called to leadership in a period of
consequence. We've entered a great ideological conflict we did nothing
to invite. We see great changes in science and commerce that will
influence all our lives. Sometimes it can seem that history is turning
in a wide arc, toward an unknown shore. Yet the destination of history
is determined by human action, and every great movement of history comes
to a point of choosing.

Lincoln could have accepted peace at the cost of disunity and continued
slavery. Martin Luther King could have stopped at Birmingham or at
Selma, and achieved only half a victory over segregation. The United
States could have accepted the permanent division of Europe, and been
complicit in the oppression of others. Today, having come far in our own
historical journey, we must decide: Will we turn back, or finish well?

Before history is written down in books, it is written in courage. Like
Americans before us, we will show that courage and we will finish well.
We will lead freedom's advance. We will compete and excel in the global
economy. We will renew the defining moral commitments of this land. And
so we move forward -- optimistic about our country, faithful to its
cause, and confident of the victories to come.

May God bless America. (Applause.)

***
tate of the Union Address
George W. Bush
January 23, 2007

TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:

Thank you very much. Tonight, I have a high privilege and
distinct honor of my own -- as the first President to begin the State of the Union
message with these words: Madam Speaker.

In his day, the late Congressman Thomas D'Alesandro, Jr., from Baltimore,
Maryland, saw Presidents Roosevelt and Truman at this rostrum. But nothing could
compare with the sight of his only daughter, Nancy, presiding tonight as Speaker
of the House of Representatives. Congratulations, Madam Speaker.

Two Members of the House and Senate are not with us tonight, and we pray for the
recovery and speedy return of Senator Tim Johnson and Congressman Charlie
Norwood.

Madam Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished guests,
and fellow citizens:

This rite of custom brings us together at a defining hour, when decisions are
hard and courage is tested. We enter the year 2007 with large endeavors under
way, and others that are ours to begin. In all of this, much is asked of us. We
must have the will to face difficult challenges and determined enemies, and the
wisdom to face them together.

Some in this Chamber are new to the House and Senate, and I congratulate the
Democratic majority. Congress has changed, but our responsibilities have not.
Each of us is guided by our own convictions, and to these we must stay faithful.
Yet we are all held to the same standards and called to serve the same good
purposes: to extend the Nation's prosperity, to spend the people's money wisely,
to solve problems, not leave them to future generations, to guard America
against all evil, and to keep faith with those we have sent forth to defend us.

We are not the first to come here with government divided and uncertainty in the
air. Like many before us, we can work through our differences and achieve big
things for the American people. Our citizens don't much care which side of the
aisle we sit on, as long as we are willing to cross that aisle when there is
work to be done. Our job is to make life better for our fellow Americans and
help them to build a future of hope and opportunity, and this is the business
before us tonight.

A future of hope and opportunity begins with a growing economy, and that is what
we have. We are now in the 41st month of uninterrupted job growth, in a recovery
that has created 7.2 million new jobs, so far. Unemployment is low, inflation is
low, and wages are rising. The economy is on the move, and our job is to keep it
that way, not with more government but with more enterprise.

Next week, I will deliver a full report on the state of our economy. Tonight, I
want to discuss three economic reforms that deserve to be priorities for this
Congress.

First, we must balance the Federal budget. We can do so without raising taxes.
What we need to do is impose spending discipline in Washington, D.C. We set a
goal of cutting the deficit in half by 2009, and met that goal 3 years ahead of
schedule. Now let us take the next step. In the coming weeks, I will submit a
budget that eliminates the Federal deficit within the next 5 years. I ask you to
make the same commitment. Together, we can restrain the spending appetite of the
Federal Government and balance the Federal budget.

Next, there is the matter of earmarks. These special interest items are often
slipped into bills at the last hour, when not even C-SPAN is watching. In 2005
alone, the number of earmarks grew to over 13,000 and totaled nearly $18
billion. Even worse, over 90 percent of earmarks never make it to the floor of
the House and Senate. They are dropped into committee reports that are not even
part of the bill that arrives on my desk. You did not vote them into law. I did
not sign them into law. Yet they are treated as if they have the force of law.
The time has come to end this practice. So let us work together to reform the
budget process, expose every earmark to the light of day and to a vote in
Congress, and cut the number and cost of earmarks at least in half by the end of
this session.

Finally, to keep this economy strong we must take on the challenge of
entitlements. Social Security and Medicare and Medicaid are commitments of
conscience, and so it is our duty to keep them permanently sound. Yet we are
failing in that duty, and this failure will one day leave our children with
three bad options: huge tax increases, huge deficits, or huge and immediate cuts
in benefits. Everyone in this Chamber knows this to be true, yet somehow we have
not found it in ourselves to act. So let us work together and do it now. With
enough good sense and good will, you and I can fix Medicare and Medicaid, and
save Social Security.

Spreading opportunity and hope in America also requires public schools that give
children the knowledge and character they need in life. Five years ago, we rose
above partisan differences to pass the No Child Left Behind Act, preserving
local control, raising standards, and holding those schools accountable for
results. And because we acted, students are performing better in reading and
math, and minority students are closing the achievement gap.

Now the task is to build on this success, without watering down standards,
without taking control from local communities, and without back sliding and
calling it reform. We can lift student achievement even higher by giving local
leaders flexibility to turn around failing schools, and by giving families with
children stuck in failing schools the right to choose someplace better. We must
increase funds for students who struggle, and make sure these children get the
special help they need. And we can make sure our children are prepared for the
jobs of the future, and our country is more competitive, by strengthening math
and science skills. The No Child Left Behind Act has worked for America's
children, and I ask Congress to reauthorize this good law.

A future of hope and opportunity requires that all our citizens have affordable
and available health care. When it comes to health care, government has an
obligation to care for the elderly, the disabled, and poor children, and we will
meet those responsibilities. For all other Americans, private health care
insurance is the best way to meet their needs. But many Americans cannot afford
a health insurance policy.

So tonight, I propose two new initiatives to help more Americans afford their
own insurance. First, I propose a standard tax deduction for health insurance
that will be like the standard tax deduction for dependents. Families with
health insurance will pay no income or payroll taxes on $15,000 of their income.
Single Americans with health insurance will pay no income or payroll taxes on
$7,500 of their income. With this reform, more than 100 million men, women, and
children who are now covered by employer-provided insurance will benefit from
lower tax bills.

At the same time, this reform will level the playing field for those who do not
get health insurance through their job. For Americans who now purchase health
insurance on their own, this proposal would mean a substantial tax savings,
$4,500 for a family of four making $60,000 a year. And for the millions of other
Americans who have no health insurance at all, this deduction would help put a
basic private health insurance plan within their reach. Changing the Tax Code is
a vital and necessary step to making health care affordable for more Americans.

My second proposal is to help the States that are coming up with innovative ways
to cover the uninsured. States that make basic private health insurance
available to all their citizens should receive Federal funds to help them
provide this coverage to the poor and the sick. I have asked the Secretary of
Health and Human Services to work with Congress to take existing Federal funds
and use them to create "Affordable Choices" grants. These grants would give our
Nation's Governors more money and more flexibility to get private health
insurance to those most in need.

There are many other ways that Congress can help. We need to expand health
savings accounts. We need to help small businesses through association health
plans, we need to reduce costs and medical errors with better information
technology. We will encourage price transparency, and to protect good doctors
from junk lawsuits we need to pass medical liability reform. And in all we do,
we must remember that the best health care decisions are made not by government
and insurance companies, but by patients and their doctors.

Extending hope and opportunity in our country requires an immigration system
worthy of America, with laws that are fair and borders that are secure. When
laws and borders are routinely violated, this harms the interests of our
country. To secure our border, we are doubling the size of the Border Patrol,
and funding new infrastructure and technology.

Yet even with all these steps, we cannot fully secure the border unless we take
pressure off the border, and that requires a temporary worker program. We should
establish a legal and orderly path for foreign workers to enter our country to
work on a temporary basis. As a result, they won't have to try to sneak in, and
that will leave border agents free to chase down drug smugglers and criminals
and terrorists. We will enforce our immigration laws at the work site, and give
employers the tools to verify the legal status of their workers, so there is no
excuse left for violating the law. We need to uphold the great tradition of the
melting pot that welcomes and assimilates new arrivals. We need to resolve the
status of illegal immigrants who are already in our country, without animosity
and without amnesty.

Convictions run deep in this Capitol when it comes to immigration. Let us have a
serious, civil, and conclusive debate, so that you can pass, and I can sign,
comprehensive immigration reform into law.

Extending hope and opportunity depends on a stable supply of energy that keeps
America's economy running and America's environment clean. For too long our
Nation has been dependent on foreign oil, and this dependence leaves us more
vulnerable to hostile regimes, and to terrorists, who could cause huge
disruptions of oil shipments, and raise the price of oil, and do great harm to
our economy.

It is in our vital interest to diversify America's energy supply, and the way
forward is through technology. We must continue changing the way America
generates electric power, by even greater use of clean coal technology, solar
and wind energy, and clean, safe nuclear power. We need to press on with battery
research for plug-in and hybrid vehicles and expand the use of clean diesel
vehicles and biodiesel fuel. We must continue investing in new methods of
producing ethanol, using everything from wood chips, to grasses, to agricultural
wastes.

We have made a lot of progress, thanks to good policies here in Washington and
the strong response of the market. And now even more dramatic advances are
within reach. Tonight, I ask Congress to join me in pursuing a great goal. Let
us build on the work we have done and reduce gasoline usage in the United States
by 20 percent in the next 10 years. When we do that, we will be cutting our
total imports by the equivalent of three-quarters of all the oil we now import
from the Middle East.

To reach this goal, we must increase the supply of alternative fuels, by setting
a mandatory fuels standard to require 35 billion gallons of renewable and
alternative fuels in 2017. And that is nearly five times the current target. At
the same time, we need to reform and modernize fuel economy standards for cars
the way we did for light trucks, and conserve up to 8\1/2\ billion more gallons
of gasoline by 2017.

Achieving these ambitious goals will dramatically reduce our dependence on
foreign oil, but it is not going to eliminate it. So as we continue to diversify
our fuel supply, we must also step up domestic oil production in environmentally
sensitive ways. And to further protect America against severe disruptions to our
oil supply, I ask Congress to double the current capacity of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve.

America is on the verge of technological breakthroughs that will enable us to
live our lives less dependent on oil. These technologies will help us become
better stewards of the environment, and they will help us to confront the
serious challenge of global climate change.

A future of hope and opportunity requires a fair, impartial system of justice.
The lives of our citizens across our Nation are affected by the outcome of cases
pending in our Federal courts. We have a shared obligation to ensure that the
Federal courts have enough judges to hear those cases and deliver timely
rulings. As president, I have a duty to nominate qualified men and women to
vacancies on the Federal bench. And the United States Senate has a duty as well,
to give those nominees a fair hearing and a prompt up-or-down vote on the Senate
floor.

For all of us in this room, there is no higher responsibility than to protect
the people of this country from danger. Five years have come and gone since we
saw the scenes and felt the sorrow that the terrorists can cause. We have had
time to take stock of our situation. We have added many critical protections to
guard the homeland. We know with certainty that the horrors of that September
morning were just a glimpse of what the terrorists intend for us, unless we stop
them.

With the distance of time, we find ourselves debating the causes of conflict and
the course we have followed. Such debates are essential when a great democracy
faces great questions. Yet one question has surely been settled, that to win the
war on terror we must take the fight to the enemy.

From the start, America and our allies have protected our people by staying on
the offense. The enemy knows that the days of comfortable sanctuary, easy
movement, steady financing, and free-flowing communications are long over. For
the terrorists, life since 9/11 has never been the same.

Our success in this war is often measured by the things that did not happen. We
cannot know the full extent of the attacks that we and our allies have prevents,
but here is some of what we do know: we stopped an al Qaeda plot to fly a
hijacked airplane into the tallest building on the west coast. We broke up a
Southeast Asian terrorist cell grooming operatives for attacks inside the United
States. We uncovered an al Qaeda cell developing anthrax to be used in attacks
against America. And just last August, British authorities uncovered a plot to
blow up passenger planes bound for America over the Atlantic Ocean. For each
life saved, we owe a debt of gratitude to the brave public servants who devote
their lives to finding the terrorists and stopping them.

Every success against the terrorists is a reminder of the shoreless ambitions of
this enemy. The evil that inspired and rejoiced in 9/11 is still at work in the
world. And so long as that is the case, America is still a Nation at war.

In the minds of the terrorists, this war began well before September 11 and will
not end until their radical vision is fulfilled. And these past 5 years have
given us a much clearer view of the nature of this enemy. Al Qaeda and its
followers are Sunni extremists, possessed by hatred and commanded by a harsh and
narrow ideology. Take almost any principle of civilization, and their goal is
the opposite. They preach with threats, instruct with bullets and bombs, and
promise paradise for the murder of the innocent.

Our enemies are quite explicit about their intentions. They want to overthrow
moderate governments and establish safe havens from which to plan and carry out
new attacks on our country. By killing and terrorizing Americans, they want to
force our country to retreat from the world and abandon the cause of liberty.
They would then be free to impose their will and spread their totalitarian
ideology. Listen to this warning from the late terrorist Zarqawi: "We will
sacrifice our blood and bodies to put an end to your dreams, and what is coming
is even worse." And Osama bin Laden declared: "Death is better than living on
this Earth with the unbelievers among us."

These men are not given to idle words, and they are just one camp in the
Islamist radical movement. In recent times, it has also become clear that we
face an escalating danger from Shia extremists who are just as hostile to
America and are also determined to dominate the Middle East. Many are known to
take direction from the regime in Iran, which is funding and arming terrorists
like Hezbollah, a group second only to al Qaeda in the American lives it has
taken.

The Shia and Sunni extremists are different faces of the same totalitarian
threat. Whatever slogans they chant, when they slaughter the innocent, they have
the same wicked purposes. They want to kill Americans, kill democracy in the
Middle East, and gain the weapons to kill on an even more horrific scale.

In the sixth year since our Nation was attacked, I wish I could report to you
that the dangers had ended. They have not. And so it remains the policy of this
government to use every lawful and proper tool of intelligence, diplomacy, law
enforcement, and military action to do our duty, to find these enemies, and to
protect the American people.

This war is more than a clash of arms. It is a decisive ideological struggle,
and the security of our Nation is in the balance. To prevail, we must remove the
conditions that inspire blind hatred, and drove 19 men to get onto airplanes and
to come and kill us. What every terrorist fears most is human freedom, societies
where men and women make their own choices, answer to their own conscience, and
live by their hopes instead of their resentments. Free people are not drawn to
violent and malignant ideologies, and most will choose a better way when they
are given a chance. So we advance our own security interests by helping
moderates, reformers, and brave voices for democracy. The great question of our
day is whether America will help men and women in the Middle East to build free
societies and share in the rights of all humanity. And I say, for the sake of
our own security, we must.

In the last 2 years, we have seen the desire for liberty in the broader Middle
East, and we have been sobered by the enemy's fierce reaction. In 2005, the
world watched as the citizens of Lebanon raised the banner of the Cedar
Revolution. They drove out the Syrian occupiers, and chose new leaders in free
elections. In 2005, the people of Afghanistan defied the terrorists and elected
a democratic legislature. And in 2005, the Iraqi people held three national
elections, choosing a transitional government, adopting the most progressive,
democratic constitution in the Arab world, and then electing a government under
that constitution. Despite endless threats from the killers in their midst,
nearly 12 million Iraqi citizens came out to vote in a show of hope and
solidarity we should never forget.

A thinking enemy watched all of these scenes, adjusted their tactics, and in
2006 they struck back. In Lebanon, assassins took the life of Pierre Gemayel, a
prominent participant in the Cedar Revolution. Hezbollah terrorists, with
support from Syria and Iran, sowed conflict in the region and are seeking to
undermine Lebanon's legitimately elected government. In Afghanistan, Taliban and
al Qaeda fighters tried to regain power by regrouping and engaging Afghan and
NATO forces. In Iraq, al Qaeda and other Sunni extremists blew up one of the
most sacred places in Shia Islam, the Golden Mosque of Samarra. This atrocity,
directed at a Muslim house of prayer, was designed to provoke retaliation from
Iraqi Shia, and it succeeded. Radical Shia elements, some of whom receive
support from Iran, formed death squads. The result was a tragic escalation of
sectarian rage and reprisal that continues to this day.

This is not the fight we entered in Iraq, but it is the fight we are in. Every
one of us wishes that this war were over and won. Yet it would not be like us to
leave our promises unkept, our friends abandoned, and our own security at risk.
Ladies and gentlemen, on this day, at this hour, it is still within our power to
shape the outcome of this battle. Let us find our resolve and turn events toward
victory.

We are carrying out a new strategy in Iraq, a plan that demands more from Iraq's
elected government and gives our forces in Iraq the reinforcements they need to
complete their mission. Our goal is a democratic Iraq that upholds the rule of
law, respects the rights of its people, provides them security, and is an ally
in the war on terror.

In order to make progress toward this goal, the Iraqi Government must stop the
sectarian violence in its capital. But the Iraqis are not yet ready to do this
on their own. So we are deploying reinforcements of more than 20,000 additional
soldiers and marines to Iraq. The vast majority will go to Baghdad, where they
will help Iraqi forces to clear and secure neighborhoods, and serve as advisers
embedded in Iraqi Army units. With Iraqis in the lead, our forces will help
secure the city by chasing down the terrorists, insurgents, and the roaming
death squads. And in Anbar province, where al Qaeda terrorists have gathered and
local forces have begun showing a willingness to fight them, we are sending an
additional 4,000 United States marines, with orders to find the terrorists and
clear them out. We did not drive al Qaeda out of their safe haven in Afghanistan
only to let them set up a new safe haven in a free Iraq.

The people of Iraq want to live in peace, and now is the time for their
government to act. Iraq's leaders know that our commitment is not open ended.
They have promised to deploy more of their own troops to secure Baghdad, and
they must do so. They have pledged that they will confront violent radicals of
any faction or political party. And they need to follow through and lift
needless restrictions on Iraqi and Coalition forces so these troops can achieve
their mission of bringing security to all of the people of Baghdad. Iraq's
leaders have committed themselves to a series of benchmarks to achieve
reconciliation, to share oil revenues among all of Iraq's citizens, to put the
wealth of Iraq into the rebuilding of Iraq, to allow more Iraqis to reenter
their nation's civic life, to hold local elections, and to take responsibility
for security in every Iraqi province. But for all of this to happen, Baghdad
must be secured. And our plan will help the Iraqi Government take back its
capital and make good on its commitments.

My fellow citizens, our military commanders and I have carefully weighed the
options. We discussed every possible approach. In the end, I chose this course
of action because it provides the best chance for success. Many in this Chamber
understand that America must not fail in Iraq, because you understand that the
consequences of failure would be grievous and far reaching.

If American forces step back before Baghdad is secure, the Iraqi Government
would be overrun by extremists on all sides. We could expect an epic battle
between Shia extremists backed by Iran, and Sunni extremists aided by al Qaeda
and supporters of the old regime. A contagion of violence could spill out across
the country, and in time the entire region could be drawn into the conflict.

For America, this is a nightmare scenario. For the enemy, this is the objective.
Chaos is their greatest ally in this struggle. And out of chaos in Iraq would
emerge an emboldened enemy with new safe havens, new recruits, new resources,
and an even greater determination to harm America. To allow this to happen would
be to ignore the lessons of September 11 and invite tragedy. And ladies and
gentlemen, nothing is more important at this moment in our history than for
America to succeed in the Middle East, to succeed in Iraq, and to spare the
American people from this danger.

This is where matters stand tonight, in the here and now. I have spoken with
many of you in person. I respect you and the arguments you have made. We went
into this largely united, in our assumptions and in our convictions. And
whatever you voted for, you did not vote for failure. Our country is pursuing a
new strategy in Iraq, and I ask you to give it a chance to work. And I ask you
to support our troops in the field, and those on their way.

The war on terror we fight today is a generational struggle that will continue
long after you and I have turned our duties over to others. That is why it is
important to work together so our Nation can see this great effort through. Both
parties and both branches should work in close consultation. And this is why I
propose to establish a special advisory council on the war on terror, made up of
leaders in Congress from both political parties. We will share ideas for how to
position America to meet every challenge that confronts us. And we will show our
enemies abroad that we are united in the goal of victory.

One of the first steps we can take together is to add to the ranks of our
military, so that the American Armed Forces are ready for all the challenges
ahead. Tonight I ask the Congress to authorize an increase in the size of our
active Army and Marine Corps by 92,000 in the next 5 years. A second task we can
take on together is to design and establish a volunteer civilian reserve corps.
Such a corps would function much like our military reserve. It would ease the
burden on the Armed Forces by allowing us to hire civilians with critical skills
to serve on missions abroad when America needs them. And it would give people
across America who do not wear the uniform a chance to serve in the defining
struggle of our time.

Americans can have confidence in the outcome of this struggle, because we are
not in this struggle alone. We have a diplomatic strategy that is rallying the
world to join in the fight against extremism. In Iraq, multinational forces are
operating under a mandate from the United Nations, and we are working with
Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the gulf states to increase support for Iraq's
government. The United Nations has imposed sanctions on Iran and made it clear
that the world will not allow the regime in Tehran to acquire nuclear weapons.
With the other members of the Quartet, the U.N., the European Union and Russia,
we are pursuing diplomacy to help bring peace to the Holy Land, and pursuing the
establishment of a democratic Palestinian state living side by side with Israel
in peace and security. In Afghanistan, NATO has taken the lead in turning back
the Taliban and al Qaeda offensive, the first time the alliance has deployed
forces outside the North Atlantic area. Together with our partners in China,
Japan, Russia, and South Korea, we are pursuing intensive diplomacy to achieve a
Korean Peninsula free of nuclear weapons. And we will continue to speak out for
the cause of freedom in places like Cuba, Belarus, and Burma, and continue to
awaken the conscience of the world to save the people of Darfur.

American foreign policy is more than a matter of war and diplomacy. Our work in
the world is also based on a timeless truth: to whom much is given, much is
required. We hear the call to take on the challenges of hunger and poverty and
disease, and that is precisely what America is doing. We must continue to fight
HIV/AIDS, especially on the continent of Africa. Because you funded our
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, the number of people receiving life-saving drugs
has grown from 50,000 to more than 800,000 in 3 short years. I ask you to
continue funding our efforts to fight HIV/AIDS, and I ask you to provide $1.2
billion over 5 years so we can combat malaria in 15 African countries. I ask
that you fund the Millennium Challenge Account so that American aid reaches the
people who need it, in nations where democracy is on the rise and corruption is
in retreat. And let us continue to support the expanded trade and debt relief
that are the best hope for lifting lives and eliminating poverty.

When America serves others in this way, we show the strength and generosity of
our country. These deeds reflect the character of our people. The greatest
strength we have is the heroic kindness, courage, and self-sacrifice of the
American people. You see this spirit often if you know where to look, and
tonight we need only look above to the gallery.

Dikembe Mutombo grew up in Africa amid great poverty and disease. He came to
Georgetown University on a scholarship to study medicine, but Coach John
Thompson got a look at Dikembe and had a different idea. Dikembe became a star
in the NBA and a citizen of the United States. But he never forgot the land of
his birth, or the duty to share his blessings with others. He built a brand-new
hospital in his old hometown. A friend has said of this good hearted man:
"Mutombo believes that God has given him this opportunity to do great things."
And we are proud to call this son of the Congo a citizen of the United States of
America.


After her daughter was born, Julie Aigner-Clark searched for ways to share her
love of music and art with her child. So she borrowed some equipment and began
filming children's videos in her basement. The Baby Einstein Company was born,
and in just 5 years her business grew to more than $20 million in sales. In
November 2001, Julie sold Baby Einstein to Walt Disney Company; and with her
help, Baby Einstein has grown into a $200 million business. Julie represents the
great enterprising spirit of America. And she is using her success to help
others, producing child safety videos with John Walsh of the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children. Julie says of her new project: "I believe it is
the most important thing that I have ever done. I believe that children have the
right to live in a world that is safe." And so tonight we are pleased to welcome
this talented business entrepreneur and generous social entrepreneur, Julie
Aigner-Clark.

Three weeks ago, Wesley Autry was waiting at a Harlem subway station with his
two little girls, when he saw a man fall into the path of a train. With seconds
to act, Wesley jumped onto the tracks, pulled the man into the space between the
rails, and held him as the train passed right above their heads. He insists he
is not a hero. He says: "We got guys and girls overseas dying for us to have our
freedoms. We have got to show each other some love." There is something
wonderful about a country that produces a brave and humble man like Wesley
Autry.

Tommy Rieman was a teenager pumping gas in Independence, Kentucky, when he
enlisted in the United States Army. In December 2003, he was on a reconnaissance
mission in Iraq when his team came under heavy enemy fire. From his Humvee,
Sergeant Rieman returned fire. He used his body as a shield to protect his
gunner. He was shot in the chest and arm, and received shrapnel wounds to his
legs, yet he refused medical attention and stayed in the fight. He helped to
repel a second attack, firing grenades at the enemy's position. For his
exceptional courage, Sergeant Rieman was awarded the Silver Star. And like so
many other Americans who have volunteered to defend us, he has earned the
respect and the gratitude of our whole country.

In such courage and compassion, ladies and gentlemen, we see the spirit and
character of America, and these qualities are not in short supply. This is a
decent and honorable country, and resilient, too. We have been through a lot
together. We have met challenges and faced dangers, and we know that more lie
ahead. Yet we can go forward with confidence, because the state of our Union is
strong, our cause in the world is right, and tonight that cause goes on. God
bless. Thank you for your prayers. Thank you.


***

State of the Union Address
George W. Bush
January 28, 2008

Madam Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished
guests, and fellow citizens:

Seven years have passed since I first stood before you at this rostrum. In
that time, our country has been tested in ways none of us could have imagined.
We have faced hard decisions about peace and war, rising competition in the
world economy, and the health and welfare of our citizens. These issues call
for vigorous debate, and I think its fair to say weve answered that call. Yet
history will record that amid our differences, we acted with purpose. And
together, we showed the world the power and resilience of American
self-government.

All of us were sent to Washington to carry out the peoples business. That is
the purpose of this body. It is the meaning of our oath. And it remains our
charge to keep.

The actions of the 110th Congress will affect the security and prosperity of
our nation long after this session has ended. In this election year, let us
show our fellow Americans that we recognize our responsibilities and are
determined to meet them. And let us show them that Republicans and Democrats
can compete for votes and cooperate for results at the same time.

From expanding opportunity to protecting our country, we have made good
progress. Yet we have unfinished business before us, and the American people
expect us to get it done.

In the work ahead, we must be guided by the philosophy that made our nation
great. As Americans, we believe in the power of individuals to determine their
destiny and shape the course of history. We believe that the most reliable
guide for our country is the collective wisdom of ordinary citizens. So in all
we do, we must trust in the ability of free people to make wise decisions, and
empower them to improve their lives and their futures.

To build a prosperous future, we must trust people with their own money and
empower them to grow our economy. As we meet tonight, our economy is
undergoing a period of uncertainty. America has added jobs for a record 52
straight months, but jobs are now growing at a slower pace. Wages are up, but
so are prices for food and gas. Exports are rising, but the housing market has
declined. And at kitchen tables across our country, there is concern about our
economic future.

In the long run, Americans can be confident about our economic growth. But in
the short run, we can all see that growth is slowing. So last week, my
administration reached agreement with Speaker Pelosi and Republican Leader
Boehner on a robust growth package that includes tax relief for individuals
and families and incentives for business investment. The temptation will be to
load up the bill. That would delay it or derail it, and neither option is
acceptable. This is a good agreement that will keep our economy growing and
our people working. And this Congress must pass it as soon as possible.

We have other work to do on taxes. Unless the Congress acts, most of the tax
relief we have delivered over the past seven years will be taken away. Some in
Washington argue that letting tax relief expire is not a tax increase. Try
explaining that to 116 million American taxpayers who would see their taxes
rise by an average of $1,800. Others have said they would personally be happy
to pay higher taxes. I welcome their enthusiasm, and I am pleased to report
that the I.R.S. accepts both checks and money orders.

Most Americans think their taxes are high enough. With all the other pressures
on their finances, American families should not have to worry about the
federal government taking a bigger bite out of their paychecks. There is only
one way to eliminate this uncertainty: make the tax relief permanent. And
members of Congress should know: If any bill raising taxes reaches my desk, I
will veto it.

Just as we trust Americans with their own money, we need to earn their trust
by spending their tax dollars wisely. Next week, I will send you a budget that
terminates or substantially reduces 151 wasteful or bloated programs totaling
more than $18 billion. And this budget will keep America on track for a
surplus in 2012. American families have to balance their budgets, and so
should their government.

The peoples trust in their government is undermined by Congressional earmarks 
special interest projects that are often snuck in at the last minute, without
discussion or debate. Last year, I asked you to voluntarily cut the number and
cost of earmarks in half. I also asked you to stop slipping earmarks into
committee reports that never even come to a vote. Unfortunately, neither goal
was met. So this time, if you send me an appropriations bill that does not cut
the number and cost of earmarks in half, I will send it back to you with my
veto. And tomorrow, I will issue an Executive Order that directs federal
agencies to ignore any future earmark that is not voted on by the Congress. If
these items are truly worth funding, the Congress should debate them in the
open and hold a public vote.

Our shared responsibilities extend beyond matters of taxes and spending.

On housing, we must trust Americans with the responsibility of homeownership
and empower them to weather turbulent times in the housing market. My
administration brought together the HOPE NOW alliance, which is helping many
struggling homeowners avoid foreclosure. The Congress can help even more.
Tonight I ask you to pass legislation to reform Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
modernize the Federal Housing Administration, and allow state housing agencies
to issue tax-free bonds to help homeowners refinance their mortgages. These
are difficult times for many American families, and by taking these steps, we
can help more of them keep their homes.

To build a future of quality health care, we must trust patients and doctors
to make medical decisions and empower them with better information and better
options. We share a common goal: making health care more affordable and
accessible for all Americans. The best way to achieve that goal is by
expanding consumer choice, not government control. So I have proposed ending
the bias in the tax code against those who do not get their health insurance
through their employer. This one reform would put private coverage within
reach for millions, and I call on the Congress to pass it this year. The
Congress must also expand health savings accounts, create Association Health
Plans for small businesses, promote health information technology, and
confront the epidemic of junk medical lawsuits. With all these steps, we will
help ensure that decisions about your medical care are made in the privacy of
your doctors office  not in the halls of Congress.

On education, we must trust students to learn if given the chance and empower
parents to demand results from our schools. In neighborhoods across our
country, there are boys and girls with dreams  and a decent education is their
only hope of achieving them. Six years ago, we came together to pass the No
Child Left Behind Act, and today no one can deny its results. Last year,
fourth and eighth graders achieved the highest math scores on record. Reading
scores are on the rise. And African-American and Hispanic students posted
all-time highs. Now we must work together to increase accountability, add
flexibility for states and districts, reduce the number of high school
dropouts, and provide extra help for struggling schools. Members of Congress:
The No Child Left Behind Act is a bipartisan achievement. It is succeeding.
And we owe it to Americas children, their parents, and their teachers to
strengthen this good law.

We must also do more to help children when their schools do not measure up.
Thanks to the D.C. Opportunity Scholarships you approved, more than 2,600 of
the poorest children in our nations capital have found new hope at a
faith-based or other non-public school. Sadly, these schools are disappearing
at an alarming rate in many of Americas inner cities. So I will convene a
White House summit aimed at strengthening these lifelines of learning. And to
open the doors of these schools to more children, I ask you to support a new
$300 million program called Pell Grants for Kids. We have seen how Pell Grants
help low-income college students realize their full potential. Together, we
have expanded the size and reach of these grants. Now lets apply that same
spirit to help liberate poor children trapped in failing public schools.

On trade, we must trust American workers to compete with anyone in the world
and empower them by opening up new markets overseas. Today, our economic
growth increasingly depends on our ability to sell American goods, crops, and
services all over the world. So we are working to break down barriers to trade
and investment wherever we can. We are working for a successful Doha round of
trade talks, and we must complete a good agreement this year. At the same
time, we are pursuing opportunities to open up new markets by passing free
trade agreements.

I thank the Congress for approving a good agreement with Peru. Now I ask you
to approve agreements with Colombia, Panama, and South Korea. Many products
from these nations now enter America duty-free, yet many of our products face
steep tariffs in their markets. These agreements will level the playing field.
They will give us better access to nearly 100 million customers. And they will
support good jobs for the finest workers in the world: those whose products
say "Made in the USA."

These agreements also promote Americas strategic interests. The first
agreement that will come before you is with Colombia, a friend of America that
is confronting violence and terror and fighting drug traffickers. If we fail
to pass this agreement, we will embolden the purveyors of false populism in
our hemisphere. So we must come together, pass this agreement, and show our
neighbors in the region that democracy leads to a better life.

Trade brings better jobs, better choices, and better prices. Yet for some
Americans, trade can mean losing a job, and the federal government has a
responsibility to help. I ask the Congress to reauthorize and reform trade
adjustment assistance, so we can help these displaced workers learn new skills
and find new jobs.

To build a future of energy security, we must trust in the creative genius of
American researchers and entrepreneurs and empower them to pioneer a new
generation of clean energy technology. Our security, our prosperity, and our
environment all require reducing our dependence on oil. Last year, I asked you
to pass legislation to reduce oil consumption over the next decade, and you
responded. Together we should take the next steps: Let us fund new
technologies that can generate coal power while capturing carbon emissions.
Let us increase the use of renewable power and emissions-free nuclear power.
Let us continue investing in advanced battery technology and renewable fuels
to power the cars and trucks of the future. Let us create a new international
clean technology fund, which will help developing nations like India and China
make greater use of clean energy sources. And let us complete an international
agreement that has the potential to slow, stop, and eventually reverse the
growth of greenhouse gases. This agreement will be effective only if it
includes commitments by every major economy and gives none a free ride. The
United States is committed to strengthening our energy security and
confronting global climate change. And the best way to meet these goals is for
America to continue leading the way toward the development of cleaner and more
efficient technology.

To keep America competitive into the future, we must trust in the skill of our
scientists and engineers and empower them to pursue the breakthroughs of
tomorrow. Last year, the Congress passed legislation supporting the American
Competitiveness Initiative, but never followed through with the funding. This
funding is essential to keeping our scientific edge. So I ask the Congress to
double federal support for critical basic research in the physical sciences
and ensure America remains the most dynamic nation on earth.

On matters of science and life, we must trust in the innovative spirit of
medical researchers and empower them to discover new treatments while
respecting moral boundaries. In November, we witnessed a landmark achievement
when scientists discovered a way to reprogram adult skin cells to act like
embryonic stem cells. This breakthrough has the potential to move us beyond
the divisive debates of the past by extending the frontiers of medicine
without the destruction of human life. So we are expanding funding for this
type of ethical medical research. And as we explore promising avenues of
research, we must also ensure that all life is treated with the dignity it
deserves. So I call on the Congress to pass legislation that bans unethical
practices such as the buying, selling, patenting, or cloning of human life.

On matters of justice, we must trust in the wisdom of our Founders and empower
judges who understand that the Constitution means what it says. I have
submitted judicial nominees who will rule by the letter of the law, not the
whim of the gavel. Many of these nominees are being unfairly delayed. They are
worthy of confirmation, and the Senate should give each of them a prompt
up-or-down vote.

In communities across our land, we must trust in the good heart of the
American people and empower them to serve their neighbors in need. Over the
past seven years, more of our fellow citizens have discovered that the pursuit
of happiness leads to the path of service. Americans have volunteered in
record numbers. Charitable donations are higher than ever. Faith-based groups
are bringing hope to pockets of despair, with newfound support from the
federal government. And to help guarantee equal treatment for faith-based
organizations when they compete for federal funds, I ask you to permanently
extend Charitable Choice.

Tonight the armies of compassion continue the march to a new day in the Gulf
Coast. America honors the strength and resilience of the people of this
region. We reaffirm our pledge to help them build stronger and better than
before. And tonight I am pleased to announce that in April we will host this
years North American Summit of Canada, Mexico, and the United States in the
great city of New Orleans.

There are two other pressing challenges that I have raised repeatedly before
this body, and that this body has failed to address: entitlement spending and
immigration.

Every Member in this chamber knows that spending on entitlement programs like
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid is growing faster than we can afford.
And we all know the painful choices ahead if America stays on this path:
massive tax increases, sudden and drastic cuts in benefits, or crippling
deficits. I have laid out proposals to reform these programs. Now I ask
members of Congress to offer your proposals and come up with a bipartisan
solution to save these vital programs for our children and grandchildren.

The other pressing challenge is immigration. America needs to secure our
borders  and with your help, my administration is taking steps to do so. We
are increasing work site enforcement, we are deploying fences and advanced
technologies to stop illegal crossings, we have effectively ended the policy
of "catch and release" at the border, and by the end of this year, we will
have doubled the number of border patrol agents. Yet we also need to
acknowledge that we will never fully secure our border until we create a
lawful way for foreign workers to come here and support our economy. This will
take pressure off the border and allow law enforcement to concentrate on those
who mean us harm. We must also find a sensible and humane way to deal with
people here illegally. Illegal immigration is complicated, but it can be
resolved. And it must be resolved in a way that upholds both our laws and our
highest ideals.

This is the business of our nation here at home. Yet building a prosperous
future for our citizens also depends on confronting enemies abroad and
advancing liberty in troubled regions of the world.

Our foreign policy is based on a clear premise: We trust that people, when
given the chance, will choose a future of freedom and peace. In the last seven
years, we have witnessed stirring moments in the history of liberty. We have
seen citizens in Georgia and Ukraine stand up for their right to free and fair
elections. We have seen people in Lebanon take to the streets to demand their
independence. We have seen Afghans emerge from the tyranny of the Taliban to
choose a new president and a new parliament. We have seen jubilant Iraqis
holding up ink-stained fingers and celebrating their freedom. And these images
of liberty have inspired us.

In the past seven years, we have also seen images that have sobered us. We
have watched throngs of mourners in Lebanon and Pakistan carrying the caskets
of beloved leaders taken by the assassins hand. We have seen wedding guests in
blood-soaked finery staggering from a hotel in Jordan, Afghans and Iraqis
blown up in mosques and markets, and trains in London and Madrid ripped apart
by bombs. And on a clear September day, we saw thousands of our fellow
citizens taken from us in an instant. These horrific images serve as a grim
reminder: The advance of liberty is opposed by terrorists and extremists  evil
men who despise freedom, despise America, and aim to subject millions to their
violent rule.

Since September 11, we have taken the fight to these terrorists and
extremists. We will stay on the offense, we will keep up the pressure, and we
will deliver justice to the enemies of America.

We are engaged in the defining ideological struggle of the 21st century. The
terrorists oppose every principle of humanity and decency that we hold dear.
Yet in this war on terror, there is one thing we and our enemies agree on: In
the long run, men and women who are free to determine their own destinies will
reject terror and refuse to live in tyranny. That is why the terrorists are
fighting to deny this choice to people in Lebanon,

Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Palestinian Territories. And that is why,
for the security of America and the peace of the world, we are spreading the
hope of freedom.

In Afghanistan, America, our 25 NATO allies, and 15 partner nations are
helping the Afghan people defend their freedom and rebuild their country.
Thanks to the courage of these military and civilian personnel, a nation that
was once a safe haven for Al Qaeda is now a young democracy where boys and
girls are going to school, new roads and hospitals are being built, and people
are looking to the future with new hope. These successes must continue, so we
are adding 3,200 Marines to our forces in Afghanistan, where they will fight
the terrorists and train the Afghan Army and police. Defeating the Taliban and
Al Qaeda is critical to our security, and I thank the Congress for supporting
Americas vital mission in Afghanistan.

In Iraq, the terrorists and extremists are fighting to deny a proud people
their liberty and to establish safe havens for attacks across the world. One
year ago, our enemies were succeeding in their efforts to plunge Iraq into
chaos. So we reviewed our strategy and changed course. We launched a surge of
American forces into Iraq. And we gave our troops a new mission: Work with
Iraqi forces to protect the Iraqi people, pursue the enemy in its strongholds,
and deny the terrorists sanctuary anywhere in the country.

The Iraqi people quickly realized that something dramatic had happened. Those
who had worried that America was preparing to abandon them instead saw tens of
thousands of American forces flowing into their country. They saw our forces
moving into neighborhoods, clearing out the terrorists, and staying behind to
ensure the enemy did not return. And they saw our troops, along with
provincial reconstruction teams that include foreign service officers and
other skilled public servants, coming in to ensure that improved security was
followed by improvements in daily life. Our military and civilians in Iraq are
performing with courage and distinction, and they have the gratitude of our
whole nation.

The Iraqis launched a surge of their own. In the fall of 2006, Sunni tribal
leaders grew tired of Al Qaedas brutality and started a popular uprising
called "the Anbar Awakening." Over the past year, similar movements have
spread across the country. And today, this grass-roots surge includes more
than 80,000 Iraqi citizens who are fighting the terrorists. The government in
Baghdad has stepped forward as well  adding more than 100,000 new Iraqi
soldiers and police during the past year.

While the enemy is still dangerous and more work remains, the American and
Iraqi surges have achieved results few of us could have imagined just one year
ago:

When we met last year, many said containing the violence was impossible. A
year later, high profile terrorist attacks are down, civilian deaths are down,
and sectarian killings are down.

When we met last year, militia extremists  some armed and trained by Iran 
were wreaking havoc in large areas of Iraq. A year later, coalition and Iraqi
forces have killed or captured hundreds of militia fighters. And Iraqis of all
backgrounds increasingly realize that defeating these militia fighters is
critical to the future of their country.

When we met last year, Al Qaeda had sanctuaries in many areas of Iraq, and
their leaders had just offered American forces safe passage out of the
country. Today, it is Al Qaeda that is searching for safe passage. They have
been driven from many of the strongholds they once held, and over the past
year, we have captured or killed thousands of extremists in Iraq, including
hundreds of key Al Qaeda leaders and operatives. Last month, Osama bin Laden
released a tape in which he railed against Iraqi tribal leaders who have
turned on Al Qaeda and admitted that Coalition forces are growing stronger in
Iraq. Ladies and gentlemen, some may deny the surge is working, but among the
terrorists there is no doubt. Al Qaeda is on the run in Iraq, and this enemy
will be defeated.

When we met last year, our troop levels in Iraq were on the rise. Today,
because of the progress just described, we are implementing a policy of
"return on success," and the surge forces we sent to Iraq are beginning to
come home.

This progress is a credit to the valor of our troops and the brilliance of
their commanders. This evening, I want to speak directly to our men and women
on the front lines. Soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, and coast guardsmen:
In the past year, you have done everything we have asked of you, and more. Our
nation is grateful for your courage. We are proud of your accomplishments. And
tonight in this hallowed chamber, with the American people as our witness, we
make you a solemn pledge: In the fight ahead, you will have all you need to
protect our nation. And I ask the Congress to meet its responsibilities to
these brave men and women by fully funding our troops.

Our enemies in Iraq have been hit hard. They are not yet defeated, and we can
still expect tough fighting ahead. Our objective in the coming year is to
sustain and build on the gains we made in 2007, while transitioning to the
next phase of our strategy. American troops are shifting from leading
operations, to partnering with Iraqi forces, and, eventually, to a protective
overwatch mission. As part of this transition, one Army brigade combat team
and one Marine Expeditionary Unit have already come home and will not be
replaced. In the coming months, four additional brigades and two Marine
battalions will follow suit. Taken together, this means more than 20,000 of
our troops are coming home.

Any further drawdown of U.S. troops will be based on conditions in Iraq and
the recommendations of our commanders. General Petraeus has warned that too
fast a drawdown could result in the "disintegration of the Iraqi Security
Forces, Al Qaeda-Iraq regaining lost ground, [and] a marked increase in
violence." Members of Congress: Having come so far and achieved so much, we
must not allow this to happen.

In the coming year, we will work with Iraqi leaders as they build on the
progress they are making toward political reconciliation. At the local level,
Sunnis, Shia and Kurds are beginning to come together to reclaim their
communities and rebuild their lives. Progress in the provinces must be matched
by progress in Baghdad. And we are seeing some encouraging signs. The national
government is sharing oil revenues with the provinces. The parliament recently
passed both a pension law and de-Baathification reform. Now they are debating
a provincial powers law. The Iraqis still have a distance to travel. But after
decades of dictatorship and the pain of sectarian violence, reconciliation is
taking place  and the Iraqi people are taking control of their future.

The mission in Iraq has been difficult and trying for our nation. But it is in
the vital interest of the United States that we succeed. A free Iraq will deny
Al Qaeda a safe haven. A free Iraq will show millions across the Middle East
that a future of liberty is possible. And a free Iraq will be a friend of
America, a partner in fighting terror, and a source of stability in a
dangerous part of the world.

By contrast, a failed Iraq would embolden extremists, strengthen Iran, and
give terrorists a base from which to launch new attacks on our friends, our
allies, and our homeland. The enemy has made its intentions clear. At a time
when the momentum seemed to favor them, Al Qaeda's top commander in Iraq
declared that they will not rest until they have attacked us here in
Washington. My fellow Americans: We will not rest either. We will not rest
until this enemy has been defeated. We must do the difficult work today, so
that years from now people will look back and say that this generation rose to
the moment, prevailed in a tough fight, and left behind a more hopeful region
and a safer America.

We are also standing against the forces of extremism in the Holy Land, where
we have new cause for hope. Palestinians have elected a president who
recognizes that confronting terror is essential to achieving a state where his
people can live in dignity and at peace with Israel. Israelis have leaders who
recognize that a peaceful, democratic Palestinian state will be a source of
lasting security. This month in Ramallah and Jerusalem, I assured leaders from
both sides that America will do, and I will do, everything we can to help them
achieve a peace agreement that defines a Palestinian state by the end of this
year. The time has come for a Holy Land where a democratic Israel and a
democratic Palestine live side-by-side in peace.

We are also standing against the forces of extremism embodied by the regime in
Tehran. Irans rulers oppress a good and talented people. And wherever freedom
advances in the Middle East, it seems the Iranian regime is there to oppose
it. Iran is funding and training militia groups in Iraq, supporting Hezbollah
terrorists in Lebanon, and backing Hamas efforts to undermine peace in the
Holy Land. Tehran is also developing ballistic missiles of increasing range
and continues to develop its capability to enrich uranium, which could be used
to create a nuclear weapon. Our message to the people of Iran is clear: We
have no quarrel with you, we respect your traditions and your history, and we
look forward to the day when you have your freedom. Our message to the leaders
of Iran is also clear: Verifiably suspend your nuclear enrichment, so
negotiations can begin. And to rejoin the community of nations, come clean
about your nuclear intentions and past actions, stop your oppression at home,
and cease your support for terror abroad. But above all, know this: America
will confront those who threaten our troops, we will stand by our allies, and
we will defend our vital interests in the Persian Gulf.

On the home front, we will continue to take every lawful and effective measure
to protect our country. This is our most solemn duty. We are grateful that
there has not been another attack on our soil since September 11. This is not
for a lack of desire or effort on the part of the enemy. In the past six
years, we have stopped numerous attacks, including a plot to fly a plane into
the tallest building in Los Angeles and another to blow up passenger jets
bound for America over the Atlantic. Dedicated men and women in our government
toil day and night to stop the terrorists from carrying out their plans. These
good citizens are saving American lives, and everyone in this chamber owes
them our thanks. And we owe them something more: We owe them the tools they
need to keep our people safe.

One of the most important tools we can give them is the ability to monitor
terrorist communications. To protect America, we need to know who the
terrorists are talking to, what they are saying, and what they are planning.
Last year, the Congress passed legislation to help us do that. Unfortunately,
the Congress set the legislation to expire on February 1. This means that if
you do not act by Friday, our ability to track terrorist threats would be
weakened and our citizens will be in greater danger. The Congress must ensure
the flow of vital intelligence is not disrupted. The Congress must pass
liability protection for companies believed to have assisted in the efforts to
defend America. We have had ample time for debate. The time to act is now.

Protecting our nation from the dangers of a new century requires more than
good intelligence and a strong military. It also requires changing the
conditions that breed resentment and allow extremists to prey on despair. So
America is using its influence to build a freer, more hopeful, and more
compassionate world. This is a reflection of our national interest and the
calling of our conscience.

America is opposing genocide in Sudan and supporting freedom in countries from
Cuba and Zimbabwe to Belarus and Burma.

America is leading the fight against global poverty, with strong education
initiatives and humanitarian assistance. We have also changed the way we
deliver aid by launching the Millennium Challenge Account. This program
strengthens democracy, transparency, and the rule of law in developing
nations, and I ask you to fully fund this important initiative.

America is leading the fight against global hunger. Today, more than half the
worlds food aid comes from the United States. And tonight, I ask the Congress
to support an innovative proposal to provide food assistance by purchasing
crops directly from farmers in the developing world, so we can build up local
agriculture and help break the cycle of famine.

America is leading the fight against disease. With your help, we are working
to cut by half the number of malaria-related deaths in 15 African nations. And
our Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief is treating 1.4 million people. We can
bring healing and hope to many more. So I ask you to maintain the principles
that have changed behavior and made this program a success. And I call on you
to double our initial commitment to fighting HIV/AIDS by approving an
additional $30 billion over the next 5 years.

America is a force for hope in the world because we are a compassionate
people, and some of the most compassionate Americans are those who have
stepped forward to protect us. We must keep faith with all who have risked
life and limb so that we might live in freedom and peace. Over the past seven
years, we have increased funding for veterans by more than 95 percent. As we
increase funding, we must also reform our veterans system to meet the needs of
a new war and a new generation. I call on the Congress to enact the reforms
recommended by Senator Bob Dole and Secretary Donna Shalala, so we can improve
the system of care for our wounded warriors and help them build lives of hope,
promise, and dignity.

Our military families also sacrifice for America. They endure sleepless nights
and the daily struggle of providing for children while a loved one is serving
far from home. We have a responsibility to provide for them. So I ask you to
join me in expanding their access to child care, creating new hiring
preferences for military spouses across the federal government, and allowing
our troops to transfer their unused education benefits to their spouses or
children. Our military families serve our nation, they inspire our nation, and
tonight our nation honors them.

The secret of our strength, the miracle of America, is that our greatness lies
not in our government, but in the spirit and determination of our people. When
the Federal Convention met in Philadelphia in 1787, our nation was bound by
the Articles of Confederation, which began with the words, "We the undersigned
delegates." When Governor Morris was asked to draft the preamble to our new
Constitution, he offered an important revision and opened with words that
changed the course of our nation and the history of the world: "We the
people."

By trusting the people, our Founders wagered that a great and noble nation
could be built on the liberty that resides in the hearts of all men and women.
By trusting the people, succeeding generations transformed our fragile young
democracy into the most powerful nation on earth and a beacon of hope for
millions. And so long as we continue to trust the people, our nation will
prosper, our liberty will be secure, and the State of our Union will remain
strong. So tonight, with confidence in freedoms power, and trust in the
people, let us set forth to do their business.

