***

Address to Joint Session of Congress 
Barack Obama 
February 24, 2009

Madame Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, and the First Lady of
the United States:

I've come here tonight not only to address the distinguished men and women in
this great chamber, but to speak frankly and directly to the men and women who
sent us here.

I know that for many Americans watching right now, the state of our economy is
a concern that rises above all others.  And rightly so.  If you haven't been
personally affected by this recession, you probably know someone who has -- a
friend; a neighbor; a member of your family.  You don't need to hear another
list of statistics to know that our economy is in crisis, because you live it
every day.  It's the worry you wake up with and the source of sleepless
nights.  It's the job you thought you'd retire from but now have lost; the
business you built your dreams upon that's now hanging by a thread; the
college acceptance letter your child had to put back in the envelope.  The
impact of this recession is real, and it is everywhere.

But while our economy may be weakened and our confidence shaken; though we are
living through difficult and uncertain times, tonight I want every American to
know this:

We will rebuild, we will recover, and the United States of America will emerge
stronger than before.

The weight of this crisis will not determine the destiny of this nation.  The
answers to our problems don't lie beyond our reach.  They exist in our
laboratories and universities; in our fields and our factories; in the
imaginations of our entrepreneurs and the pride of the hardest-working people
on Earth.  Those qualities that have made America the greatest force of
progress and prosperity in human history we still possess in ample measure. 
What is required now is for this country to pull together, confront boldly the
challenges we face, and take responsibility for our future once more.

Now, if we're honest with ourselves, we'll admit that for too long, we have
not always met these responsibilities -- as a government or as a people.  I
say this not to lay blame or look backwards, but because it is only by
understanding how we arrived at this moment that we'll be able to lift
ourselves out of this predicament.

The fact is, our economy did not fall into decline overnight.  Nor did all of
our problems begin when the housing market collapsed or the stock market sank.
 We have known for decades that our survival depends on finding new sources of
energy.  Yet we import more oil today than ever before.  The cost of health
care eats up more and more of our savings each year, yet we keep delaying
reform.  Our children will compete for jobs in a global economy that too many
of our schools do not prepare them for.  And though all these challenges went
unsolved, we still managed to spend more money and pile up more debt, both as
individuals and through our government, than ever before.

In other words, we have lived through an era where too often, short-term gains
were prized over long-term prosperity; where we failed to look beyond the next
payment, the next quarter, or the next election.  A surplus became an excuse
to transfer wealth to the wealthy instead of an opportunity to invest in our
future.  Regulations were gutted for the sake of a quick profit at the expense
of a healthy market.  People bought homes they knew they couldn't afford from
banks and lenders who pushed those bad loans anyway.  And all the while,
critical debates and difficult decisions were put off for some other time on
some other day.

Well that day of reckoning has arrived, and the time to take charge of our
future is here.

Now is the time to act boldly and wisely -- to not only revive this economy,
but to build a new foundation for lasting prosperity.  Now is the time to
jumpstart job creation, re-start lending, and invest in areas like energy,
health care, and education that will grow our economy, even as we make hard
choices to bring our deficit down.  That is what my economic agenda is
designed to do, and that's what I'd like to talk to you about tonight.

It's an agenda that begins with jobs.

As soon as I took office, I asked this Congress to send me a recovery plan by
President's Day that would put people back to work and put money in their
pockets.  Not because I believe in bigger government -- I don't.  Not because
I'm not mindful of the massive debt we've inherited -- I am.  I called for
action because the failure to do so would have cost more jobs and caused more
hardships.  In fact, a failure to act would have worsened our long-term
deficit by assuring weak economic growth for years.  That's why I pushed for
quick action.  And tonight, I am grateful that this Congress delivered, and
pleased to say that the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act is now law.

Over the next two years, this plan will save or create 3.5 million jobs.  More
than 90% of these jobs will be in the private sector -- jobs rebuilding our
roads and bridges; constructing wind turbines and solar panels; laying
broadband and expanding mass transit.

Because of this plan, there are teachers who can now keep their jobs and
educate our kids.  Health care professionals can continue caring for our sick.
 There are 57 police officers who are still on the streets of Minneapolis
tonight because this plan prevented the layoffs their department was about to
make.

Because of this plan, 95% of the working households in America will receive a
tax cut -- a tax cut that you will see in your paychecks beginning on April
1st.

Because of this plan, families who are struggling to pay tuition costs will
receive a $2,500 tax credit for all four years of college.  And Americans who
have lost their jobs in this recession will be able to receive extended
unemployment benefits and continued health care coverage to help them weather
this storm.

I know there are some in this chamber and watching at home who are skeptical
of whether this plan will work.  I understand that skepticism.  Here in
Washington, we've all seen how quickly good intentions can turn into broken
promises and wasteful spending.  And with a plan of this scale comes enormous
responsibility to get it right.

That is why I have asked Vice President Biden to lead a tough, unprecedented
oversight effort -- because nobody messes with Joe.  I have told each member
of my Cabinet as well as mayors and governors across the country that they
will be held accountable by me and the American people for every dollar they
spend.  I have appointed a proven and aggressive Inspector General to ferret
out any and all cases of waste and fraud.  And we have created a new website
called recovery.gov so that every American can find out how and where their
money is being spent.

So the recovery plan we passed is the first step in getting our economy back
on track.  But it is just the first step.  Because even if we manage this plan
flawlessly, there will be no real recovery unless we clean up the credit
crisis that has severely weakened our financial system.

I want to speak plainly and candidly about this issue tonight, because every
American should know that it directly affects you and your family's
well-being.  You should also know that the money you've deposited in banks
across the country is safe; your insurance is secure; and you can rely on the
continued operation of our financial system.  That is not the source of
concern.

The concern is that if we do not re-start lending in this country, our
recovery will be choked off before it even begins.

You see, the flow of credit is the lifeblood of our economy.  The ability to
get a loan is how you finance the purchase of everything from a home to a car
to a college education; how stores stock their shelves, farms buy equipment,
and businesses make payroll.

But credit has stopped flowing the way it should.  Too many bad loans from the
housing crisis have made their way onto the books of too many banks.  With so
much debt and so little confidence, these banks are now fearful of lending out
any more money to households, to businesses, or to each other.  When there is
no lending, families can't afford to buy homes or cars.  So businesses are
forced to make layoffs.  Our economy suffers even more, and credit dries up
even further.

That is why this administration is moving swiftly and aggressively to break
this destructive cycle, restore confidence, and re-start lending.

We will do so in several ways.  First, we are creating a new lending fund that
represents the largest effort ever to help provide auto loans, college loans,
and small business loans to the consumers and entrepreneurs who keep this
economy running.

Second, we have launched a housing plan that will help responsible families
facing the threat of foreclosure lower their monthly payments and re-finance
their mortgages.  It's a plan that won't help speculators or that neighbor
down the street who bought a house he could never hope to afford, but it will
help millions of Americans who are struggling with declining home values --
Americans who will now be able to take advantage of the lower interest rates
that this plan has already helped bring about.  In fact, the average family
who re-finances today can save nearly $2000 per year on their mortgage.

Third, we will act with the full force of the federal government to ensure
that the major banks that Americans depend on have enough confidence and
enough money to lend even in more difficult times.  And when we learn that a
major bank has serious problems, we will hold accountable those responsible,
force the necessary adjustments, provide the support to clean up their balance
sheets, and assure the continuity of a strong, viable institution that can
serve our people and our economy.

I understand that on any given day, Wall Street may be more comforted by an
approach that gives banks bailouts with no strings attached, and that holds
nobody accountable for their reckless decisions.  But such an approach won't
solve the problem.  And our goal is to quicken the day when we re-start
lending to the American people and American business and end this crisis once
and for all.

I intend to hold these banks fully accountable for the assistance they
receive, and this time, they will have to clearly demonstrate how taxpayer
dollars result in more lending for the American taxpayer.  This time, CEOs
won't be able to use taxpayer money to pad their paychecks or buy fancy drapes
or disappear on a private jet.  Those days are over.

Still, this plan will require significant resources from the federal
government -- and yes, probably more than we've already set aside.  But while
the cost of action will be great, I can assure you that the cost of inaction
will be far greater, for it could result in an economy that sputters along for
not months or years, but perhaps a decade.  That would be worse for our
deficit, worse for business, worse for you, and worse for the next generation.
 And I refuse to let that happen.

I understand that when the last administration asked this Congress to provide
assistance for struggling banks, Democrats and Republicans alike were
infuriated by the mismanagement and results that followed.  So were the
American taxpayers.  So was I.

So I know how unpopular it is to be seen as helping banks right now,
especially when everyone is suffering in part from their bad decisions.  I
promise you -- I get it.

But I also know that in a time of crisis, we cannot afford to govern out of
anger, or yield to the politics of the moment.  My job -- our job -- is to
solve the problem.  Our job is to govern with a sense of responsibility.  I
will not spend a single penny for the purpose of rewarding a single Wall
Street executive, but I will do whatever it takes to help the small business
that can't pay its workers or the family that has saved and still can't get a
mortgage.

That's what this is about.  It's not about helping banks -- it's about helping
people.  Because when credit is available again, that young family can finally
buy a new home.  And then some company will hire workers to build it.  And
then those workers will have money to spend, and if they can get a loan too,
maybe they'll finally buy that car, or open their own business.  Investors
will return to the market, and American families will see their retirement
secured once more.  Slowly, but surely, confidence will return, and our
economy will recover.

So I ask this Congress to join me in doing whatever proves necessary.  Because
we cannot consign our nation to an open-ended recession.  And to ensure that a
crisis of this magnitude never happens again, I ask Congress to move quickly
on legislation that will finally reform our outdated regulatory system.  It is
time to put in place tough, new common-sense rules of the road so that our
financial market rewards drive and innovation, and punishes short-cuts and
abuse.

The recovery plan and the financial stability plan are the immediate steps
we're taking to revive our economy in the short-term.  But the only way to
fully restore America's economic strength is to make the long-term investments
that will lead to new jobs, new industries, and a renewed ability to compete
with the rest of the world. The only way this century will be another American
century is if we confront at last the price of our dependence on oil and the
high cost of health care; the schools that aren't preparing our children and
the mountain of debt they stand to inherit.  That is our responsibility.

In the next few days, I will submit a budget to Congress.  So often, we have
come to view these documents as simply numbers on a page or laundry lists of
programs.  I see this document differently.  I see it as a vision for America
-- as a blueprint for our future.

My budget does not attempt to solve every problem or address every issue.  It
reflects the stark reality of what we've inherited -- a trillion dollar
deficit, a financial crisis, and a costly recession.

Given these realities, everyone in this chamber -- Democrats and Republicans
-- will have to sacrifice some worthy priorities for which there are no
dollars.  And that includes me.

But that does not mean we can afford to ignore our long-term challenges.  I
reject the view that says our problems will simply take care of themselves;
that says government has no role in laying the foundation for our common
prosperity.

For history tells a different story.  History reminds us that at every moment
of economic upheaval and transformation, this nation has responded with bold
action and big ideas.  In the midst of civil war, we laid railroad tracks from
one coast to another that spurred commerce and industry.  From the turmoil of
the Industrial Revolution came a system of public high schools that prepared
our citizens for a new age.  In the wake of war and depression, the GI Bill
sent a generation to college and created the largest middle-class in history. 
And a twilight struggle for freedom led to a nation of highways, an American
on the moon, and an explosion of technology that still shapes our world.

In each case, government didn't supplant private enterprise; it catalyzed
private enterprise.  It created the conditions for thousands of entrepreneurs
and new businesses to adapt and to thrive.

We are a nation that has seen promise amid peril, and claimed opportunity from
ordeal.  Now we must be that nation again.  That is why, even as it cuts back
on the programs we don't need, the budget I submit will invest in the three
areas that are absolutely critical to our economic future:  energy, health
care, and education.

It begins with energy.

We know the country that harnesses the power of clean, renewable energy will
lead the 21st century.  And yet, it is China that has launched the largest
effort in history to make their economy energy efficient.  We invented solar
technology, but we've fallen behind countries like Germany and Japan in
producing it.  New plug-in hybrids roll off our assembly lines, but they will
run on batteries made in Korea.

Well I do not accept a future where the jobs and industries of tomorrow take
root beyond our borders -- and I know you don't either.  It is time for
America to lead again.

Thanks to our recovery plan, we will double this nation's supply of renewable
energy in the next three years.  We have also made the largest investment in
basic research funding in American history -- an investment that will spur not
only new discoveries in energy, but breakthroughs in medicine, science, and
technology.

We will soon lay down thousands of miles of power lines that can carry new
energy to cities and towns across this country.  And we will put Americans to
work making our homes and buildings more efficient so that we can save
billions of dollars on our energy bills.

But to truly transform our economy, protect our security, and save our planet
from the ravages of climate change, we need to ultimately make clean,
renewable energy the profitable kind of energy.  So I ask this Congress to
send me legislation that places a market-based cap on carbon pollution and
drives the production of more renewable energy in America.  And to support
that innovation, we will invest fifteen billion dollars a year to develop
technologies like wind power and solar power; advanced biofuels, clean coal,
and more fuel-efficient cars and trucks built right here in America.

As for our auto industry, everyone recognizes that years of bad
decision-making and a global recession have pushed our automakers to the
brink.  We should not, and will not, protect them from their own bad
practices.  But we are committed to the goal of a re-tooled, re-imagined auto
industry that can compete and win.  Millions of jobs depend on it.  Scores of
communities depend on it.  And I believe the nation that invented the
automobile cannot walk away from it.

None of this will come without cost, nor will it be easy.  But this is
America.  We don't do what's easy.  We do what is necessary to move this
country forward.

For that same reason, we must also address the crushing cost of health care.

This is a cost that now causes a bankruptcy in America every thirty seconds. 
By the end of the year, it could cause 1.5 million Americans to lose their
homes.  In the last eight years, premiums have grown four times faster than
wages.  And in each of these years, one million more Americans have lost their
health insurance.  It is one of the major reasons why small businesses close
their doors and corporations ship jobs overseas.  And it's one of the largest
and fastest-growing parts of our budget.

Given these facts, we can no longer afford to put health care reform on hold.

Already, we have done more to advance the cause of health care reform in the
last thirty days than we have in the last decade.  When it was days old, this
Congress passed a law to provide and protect health insurance for eleven
million American children whose parents work full-time.  Our recovery plan
will invest in electronic health records and new technology that will reduce
errors, bring down costs, ensure privacy, and save lives.  It will launch a
new effort to conquer a disease that has touched the life of nearly every
American by seeking a cure for cancer in our time.  And it makes the largest
investment ever in preventive care, because that is one of the best ways to
keep our people healthy and our costs under control.

This budget builds on these reforms.  It includes an historic commitment to
comprehensive health care reform -- a down-payment on the principle that we
must have quality, affordable health care for every American.  It's a
commitment that's paid for in part by efficiencies in our system that are long
overdue.  And it's a step we must take if we hope to bring down our deficit in
the years to come.

Now, there will be many different opinions and ideas about how to achieve
reform, and that is why I'm bringing together businesses and workers, doctors
and health care providers, Democrats and Republicans to begin work on this
issue next week.

I suffer no illusions that this will be an easy process.  It will be hard. 
But I also know that nearly a century after Teddy Roosevelt first called for
reform, the cost of our health care has weighed down our economy and the
conscience of our nation long enough.  So let there be no doubt: health care
reform cannot wait, it must not wait, and it will not wait another year.

The third challenge we must address is the urgent need to expand the promise
of education in America.

In a global economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your
knowledge, a good education is no longer just a pathway to opportunity -- it
is a pre-requisite.

Right now, three-quarters of the fastest-growing occupations require more than
a high school diploma.  And yet, just over half of our citizens have that
level of education.  We have one of the highest high school dropout rates of
any industrialized nation.  And half of the students who begin college never
finish.

This is a prescription for economic decline, because we know the countries
that out-teach us today will out-compete us tomorrow.  That is why it will be
the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has access to a
complete and competitive education -- from the day they are born to the day
they begin a career.

Already, we have made an historic investment in education through the economic
recovery plan.  We have dramatically expanded early childhood education and
will continue to improve its quality, because we know that the most formative
learning comes in those first years of life.  We have made college affordable
for nearly seven million more students.  And we have provided the resources
necessary to prevent painful cuts and teacher layoffs that would set back our
children's progress.

But we know that our schools don't just need more resources.  They need more
reform.  That is why this budget creates new incentives for teacher
performance; pathways for advancement, and rewards for success.  We'll invest
in innovative programs that are already helping schools meet high standards
and close achievement gaps.  And we will expand our commitment to charter
schools.

It is our responsibility as lawmakers and educators to make this system work. 
But it is the responsibility of every citizen to participate in it.  And so
tonight, I ask every American to commit to at least one year or more of higher
education or career training.  This can be community college or a four-year
school; vocational training or an apprenticeship.  But whatever the training
may be, every American will need to get more than a high school diploma.  And
dropping out of high school is no longer an option.  It's not just quitting on
yourself, it's quitting on your country -- and this country needs and values
the talents of every American.  That is why we will provide the support
necessary for you to complete college and meet a new goal:  by 2020, America
will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.

I know that the price of tuition is higher than ever, which is why if you are
willing to volunteer in your neighborhood or give back to your community or
serve your country, we will make sure that you can afford a higher education. 
And to encourage a renewed spirit of national service for this and future
generations, I ask this Congress to send me the bipartisan legislation that
bears the name of Senator Orrin Hatch as well as an American who has never
stopped asking what he can do for his country -- Senator Edward Kennedy.

These education policies will open the doors of opportunity for our children. 
But it is up to us to ensure they walk through them.  In the end, there is no
program or policy that can substitute for a mother or father who will attend
those parent/teacher conferences, or help with homework after dinner, or turn
off the TV, put away the video games, and read to their child.  I speak to you
not just as a President, but as a father when I say that responsibility for
our children's education must begin at home.

There is, of course, another responsibility we have to our children.  And that
is the responsibility to ensure that we do not pass on to them a debt they
cannot pay.  With the deficit we inherited, the cost of the crisis we face,
and the long-term challenges we must meet, it has never been more important to
ensure that as our economy recovers, we do what it takes to bring this deficit
down.

I'm proud that we passed the recovery plan free of earmarks, and I want to
pass a budget next year that ensures that each dollar we spend reflects only
our most important national priorities.

Yesterday, I held a fiscal summit where I pledged to cut the deficit in half
by the end of my first term in office.  My administration has also begun to go
line by line through the federal budget in order to eliminate wasteful and
ineffective programs.  As you can imagine, this is a process that will take
some time.  But we're starting with the biggest lines.  We have already
identified two trillion dollars in savings over the next decade.

In this budget, we will end education programs that don't work and end direct
payments to large agribusinesses that don't need them.  We'll eliminate the
no-bid contracts that have wasted billions in Iraq, and reform our defense
budget so that we're not paying for Cold War-era weapons systems we don't use.
 We will root out the waste, fraud, and abuse in our Medicare program that
doesn't make our seniors any healthier, and we will restore a sense of
fairness and balance to our tax code by finally ending the tax breaks for
corporations that ship our jobs overseas.

In order to save our children from a future of debt, we will also end the tax
breaks for the wealthiest 2% of Americans.  But let me perfectly clear,
because I know you'll hear the same old claims that rolling back these tax
breaks means a massive tax increase on the American people:  if your family
earns less than $250,000 a year, you will not see your taxes increased a
single dime.  I repeat: not one single dime.  In fact, the recovery plan
provides a tax cut -- that's right, a tax cut -- for 95% of working families. 
And these checks are on the way.

To preserve our long-term fiscal health, we must also address the growing
costs in Medicare and Social Security.  Comprehensive health care reform is
the best way to strengthen Medicare for years to come.  And we must also begin
a conversation on how to do the same for Social Security, while creating
tax-free universal savings accounts for all Americans.

Finally, because we're also suffering from a deficit of trust, I am committed
to restoring a sense of honesty and accountability to our budget.  That is why
this budget looks ahead ten years and accounts for spending that was left out
under the old rules -- and for the first time, that includes the full cost of
fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan.  For seven years, we have been a nation at
war.  No longer will we hide its price.

We are now carefully reviewing our policies in both wars, and I will soon
announce a way forward in Iraq that leaves Iraq to its people and responsibly
ends this war.

And with our friends and allies, we will forge a new and comprehensive
strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan to defeat al Qaeda and combat extremism.
 Because I will not allow terrorists to plot against the American people from
safe havens half a world away.

As we meet here tonight, our men and women in uniform stand watch abroad and
more are readying to deploy. To each and every one of them, and to the
families who bear the quiet burden of their absence, Americans are united in
sending one message: we honor your service, we are inspired by your sacrifice,
and you have our unyielding support.  To relieve the strain on our forces, my
budget increases the number of our soldiers and Marines. And to keep our
sacred trust with those who serve, we will raise their pay, and give our
veterans the expanded health care and benefits that they have earned.

To overcome extremism, we must also be vigilant in upholding the values our
troops defend -- because there is no force in the world more powerful than the
example of America. That is why I have ordered the closing of the detention
center at Guantanamo Bay, and will seek swift and certain justice for captured
terrorists -- because living our values doesn't make us weaker, it makes us
safer and it makes us stronger.  And that is why I can stand here tonight and
say without exception or equivocation that the United States of America does
not torture.

In words and deeds, we are showing the world that a new era of engagement has
begun.  For we know that America cannot meet the threats of this century
alone, but the world cannot meet them without America.  We cannot shun the
negotiating table, nor ignore the foes or forces that could do us harm.  We
are instead called to move forward with the sense of confidence and candor
that serious times demand.

To seek progress toward a secure and lasting peace between Israel and her
neighbors, we have appointed an envoy to sustain our effort.  To meet the
challenges of the 21st century -- from terrorism to nuclear proliferation;
from pandemic disease to cyber threats to crushing poverty -- we will
strengthen old alliances, forge new ones, and use all elements of our national
power.

And to respond to an economic crisis that is global in scope, we are working
with the nations of the G-20 to restore confidence in our financial system,
avoid the possibility of escalating protectionism, and spur demand for
American goods in markets across the globe.  For the world depends on us to
have a strong economy, just as our economy depends on the strength of the
world's.

As we stand at this crossroads of history, the eyes of all people in all
nations are once again upon us -- watching to see what we do with this moment;
waiting for us to lead.

Those of us gathered here tonight have been called to govern in extraordinary
times.  It is a tremendous burden, but also a great privilege -- one that has
been entrusted to few generations of Americans.  For in our hands lies the
ability to shape our world for good or for ill.

I know that it is easy to lose sight of this truth -- to become cynical and
doubtful; consumed with the petty and the trivial.

But in my life, I have also learned that hope is found in unlikely places;
that inspiration often comes not from those with the most power or celebrity,
but from the dreams and aspirations of Americans who are anything but
ordinary.

I think about Leonard Abess, the bank president from Miami who reportedly
cashed out of his company, took a $60 million bonus, and gave it out to all
399 people who worked for him, plus another 72 who used to work for him.  He
didn't tell anyone, but when the local newspaper found out, he simply said,
"I knew some of these people since I was 7 years old.  I didn't feel right
getting the money myself."

I think about Greensburg, Kansas, a town that was completely destroyed by a
tornado, but is being rebuilt by its residents as a global example of how
clean energy can power an entire community -- how it can bring jobs and
businesses to a place where piles of bricks and rubble once lay.  "The tragedy
was terrible," said one of the men who helped them rebuild.  "But the folks
here know that it also provided an incredible opportunity."

And I think about Ty'Sheoma Bethea, the young girl from that school I visited
in Dillon, South Carolina -- a place where the ceilings leak, the paint peels
off the walls, and they have to stop teaching six times a day because the
train barrels by their classroom.  She has been told that her school is
hopeless, but the other day after class she went to the public library and
typed up a letter to the people sitting in this room.  She even asked her
principal for the money to buy a stamp.  The letter asks us for help, and
says, "We are just students trying to become lawyers, doctors, congressmen
like yourself and one day president, so we can make a change to not just the
state of South Carolina but also the world.  We are not quitters."

We are not quitters.

These words and these stories tell us something about the spirit of the people
who sent us here.  They tell us that even in the most trying times, amid the
most difficult circumstances, there is a generosity, a resilience, a decency,
and a determination that perseveres; a willingness to take responsibility for
our future and for posterity.

Their resolve must be our inspiration.  Their concerns must be our cause.  And
we must show them and all our people that we are equal to the task before us.

I know that we haven't agreed on every issue thus far, and there are surely
times in the future when we will part ways.  But I also know that every
American who is sitting here tonight loves this country and wants it to
succeed.  That must be the starting point for every debate we have in the
coming months, and where we return after those debates are done.  That is the
foundation on which the American people expect us to build common ground.

And if we do -- if we come together and lift this nation from the depths of
this crisis; if we put our people back to work and restart the engine of our
prosperity; if we confront without fear the challenges of our time and summon
that enduring spirit of an America that does not quit, then someday years from
now our children can tell their children that this was the time when we
performed, in the words that are carved into this very chamber, "something
worthy to be remembered."  Thank you, God Bless you, and may God Bless the
United States of America.

***

State of the Union Address
Barack Obama 
January 27, 2010

Madame Speaker, Vice President Biden, Members of Congress, distinguished
guests, and fellow Americans:

Our Constitution declares that from time to time, the President shall give to
Congress information about the state of our union. For two hundred and twenty
years, our leaders have fulfilled this duty. They have done so during periods
of prosperity and tranquility. And they have done so in the midst of war and
depression; at moments of great strife and great struggle.

It's tempting to look back on these moments and assume that our progress was
inevitable -- that America was always destined to succeed. But when the Union
was turned back at Bull Run and the Allies first landed at Omaha Beach,
victory was very much in doubt. When the market crashed on Black Tuesday and
civil rights marchers were beaten on Bloody Sunday, the future was anything
but certain. These were times that tested the courage of our convictions, and
the strength of our union. And despite all our divisions and disagreements;
our hesitations and our fears; America prevailed because we chose to move
forward as one nation, and one people.

Again, we are tested. And again, we must answer history's call.

One year ago, I took office amid two wars, an economy rocked by severe
recession, a financial system on the verge of collapse, and a government
deeply in debt. Experts from across the political spectrum warned that if we
did not act, we might face a second depression. So we acted -- immediately and
aggressively. And one year later, the worst of the storm has passed.

But the devastation remains. One in ten Americans still cannot find work. Many
businesses have shuttered. Home values have declined. Small towns and rural
communities have been hit especially hard. For those who had already known
poverty, life has become that much harder.

This recession has also compounded the burdens that America's families have
been dealing with for decades -- the burden of working harder and longer for
less; of being unable to save enough to retire or help kids with college.

So I know the anxieties that are out there right now. They're not new. These
struggles are the reason I ran for President. These struggles are what I've
witnessed for years in places like Elkhart, Indiana and Galesburg, Illinois. I
hear about them in the letters that I read each night. The toughest to read
are those written by children -- asking why they have to move from their home,
or when their mom or dad will be able to go back to work.

For these Americans and so many others, change has not come fast enough. Some
are frustrated; some are angry. They don't understand why it seems like bad
behavior on Wall Street is rewarded but hard work on Main Street isn't; or why
Washington has been unable or unwilling to solve any of our problems. They are
tired of the partisanship and the shouting and the pettiness. They know we
can't afford it. Not now.

So we face big and difficult challenges. And what the American people hope --
what they deserve -- is for all of us, Democrats and Republicans, to work
through our differences; to overcome the numbing weight of our politics. For
while the people who sent us here have different backgrounds, different
stories and different beliefs, the anxieties they face are the same. The
aspirations they hold are shared. A job that pays the bills. A chance to get
ahead. Most of all, the ability to give their children a better life.

You know what else they share? They share a stubborn resilience in the face of
adversity. After one of the most difficult years in our history, they remain
busy building cars and teaching kids; starting businesses and going back to
school. They're coaching little league and helping their neighbors. As one
woman wrote me, "We are strained but hopeful, struggling but encouraged."

It is because of this spirit -- this great decency and great strength -- that
I have never been more hopeful about America's future than I am tonight.
Despite our hardships, our union is strong. We do not give up. We do not quit.
We do not allow fear or division to break our spirit. In this new decade, it's
time the American people get a government that matches their decency; that
embodies their strength.

And tonight, I'd like to talk about how together, we can deliver on that
promise.

It begins with our economy.

Our most urgent task upon taking office was to shore up the same banks that
helped cause this crisis. It was not easy to do. And if there's one thing that
has unified Democrats and Republicans, it's that we all hated the bank
bailout. I hated it. You hated it. It was about as popular as a root canal.

But when I ran for President, I promised I wouldn't just do what was popular
-- I would do what was necessary. And if we had allowed the meltdown of the
financial system, unemployment might be double what it is today. More
businesses would certainly have closed. More homes would have surely been
lost.

So I supported the last administration's efforts to create the financial
rescue program. And when we took the program over, we made it more transparent
and accountable. As a result, the markets are now stabilized, and we have
recovered most of the money we spent on the banks.

To recover the rest, I have proposed a fee on the biggest banks. I know Wall
Street isn't keen on this idea, but if these firms can afford to hand out big
bonuses again, they can afford a modest fee to pay back the taxpayers who
rescued them in their time of need.

As we stabilized the financial system, we also took steps to get our economy
growing again, save as many jobs as possible, and help Americans who had
become unemployed.

That's why we extended or increased unemployment benefits for more than 18
million Americans; made health insurance 65% cheaper for families who get
their coverage through COBRA; and passed 25 different tax cuts.

Let me repeat: we cut taxes. We cut taxes for 95% of working families. We cut
taxes for small businesses. We cut taxes for first-time homebuyers. We cut
taxes for parents trying to care for their children. We cut taxes for 8
million Americans paying for college. As a result, millions of Americans had
more to spend on gas, and food, and other necessities, all of which helped
businesses keep more workers. And we haven't raised income taxes by a single
dime on a single person. Not a single dime.

Because of the steps we took, there are about two million Americans working
right now who would otherwise be unemployed. 200,000 work in construction and
clean energy. 300,000 are teachers and other education workers. Tens of
thousands are cops, firefighters, correctional officers, and first responders.
And we are on track to add another one and a half million jobs to this total
by the end of the year.

The plan that has made all of this possible, from the tax cuts to the jobs, is
the Recovery Act. That's right -- the Recovery Act, also known as the Stimulus
Bill. Economists on the left and the right say that this bill has helped saved
jobs and avert disaster. But you don't have to take their word for it.

Talk to the small business in Phoenix that will triple its workforce because
of the Recovery Act.

Talk to the window manufacturer in Philadelphia who said he used to be
skeptical about the Recovery Act, until he had to add two more work shifts
just because of the business it created.

Talk to the single teacher raising two kids who was told by her principal in
the last week of school that because of the Recovery Act, she wouldn't be laid
off after all.

There are stories like this all across America. And after two years of
recession, the economy is growing again. Retirement funds have started to gain
back some of their value. Businesses are beginning to invest again, and slowly
some are starting to hire again.

But I realize that for every success story, there are other stories, of men
and women who wake up with the anguish of not knowing where their next
paycheck will come from; who send out resumes week after week and hear nothing
in response. That is why jobs must be our number one focus in 2010, and that
is why I am calling for a new jobs bill tonight.

Now, the true engine of job creation in this country will always be America's
businesses. But government can create the conditions necessary for businesses
to expand and hire more workers.

We should start where most new jobs do -- in small businesses, companies that
begin when an entrepreneur takes a chance on a dream, or a worker decides its
time she became her own boss.

Through sheer grit and determination, these companies have weathered the
recession and are ready to grow. But when you talk to small business owners in
places like Allentown, Pennsylvania or Elyria, Ohio, you find out that even
though banks on Wall Street are lending again, they are mostly lending to
bigger companies. But financing remains difficult for small business owners
across the country.

So tonight, I'm proposing that we take $30 billion of the money Wall Street
banks have repaid and use it to help community banks give small businesses the
credit they need to stay afloat. I am also proposing a new small business tax
credit -- one that will go to over one million small businesses who hire new
workers or raise wages. While we're at it, let's also eliminate all capital
gains taxes on small business investment; and provide a tax incentive for all
businesses, large and small, to invest in new plants and equipment.

Next, we can put Americans to work today building the infrastructure of
tomorrow. From the first railroads to the interstate highway system, our
nation has always been built to compete. There's no reason Europe or China
should have the fastest trains, or the new factories that manufacture clean
energy products.

Tomorrow, I'll visit Tampa, Florida, where workers will soon break ground on a
new high-speed railroad funded by the Recovery Act. There are projects like
that all across this country that will create jobs and help our nation move
goods, services, and information. We should put more Americans to work
building clean energy facilities, and give rebates to Americans who make their
homes more energy efficient, which supports clean energy jobs. And to
encourage these and other businesses to stay within our borders, it's time to
finally slash the tax breaks for companies that ship our jobs overseas and
give those tax breaks to companies that create jobs in the United States of
America.

The House has passed a jobs bill that includes some of these steps. As the
first order of business this year, I urge the Senate to do the same. People
are out of work. They are hurting. They need our help. And I want a jobs bill
on my desk without delay.

But the truth is, these steps still won't make up for the seven million jobs
we've lost over the last two years. The only way to move to full employment is
to lay a new foundation for long-term economic growth, and finally address the
problems that America's families have confronted for years.

We cannot afford another so-called economic "expansion" like the one from last
decade -- what some call the "lost decade" -- where jobs grew more slowly than
during any prior expansion; where the income of the average American household
declined while the cost of health care and tuition reached record highs; where
prosperity was built on a housing bubble and financial speculation.

From the day I took office, I have been told that addressing our larger
challenges is too ambitious -- that such efforts would be too contentious,
that our political system is too gridlocked, and that we should just put
things on hold for awhile.

For those who make these claims, I have one simple question:

How long should we wait? How long should America put its future on hold?

You see, Washington has been telling us to wait for decades, even as the
problems have grown worse. Meanwhile, China's not waiting to revamp its
economy. Germany's not waiting. India's not waiting. These nations aren't
standing still. These nations aren't playing for second place. They're putting
more emphasis on math and science. They're rebuilding their infrastructure.
They are making serious investments in clean energy because they want those
jobs.

Well I do not accept second-place for the United States of America. As hard as
it may be, as uncomfortable and contentious as the debates may be, it's time
to get serious about fixing the problems that are hampering our growth.

One place to start is serious financial reform. Look, I am not interested in
punishing banks, I'm interested in protecting our economy. A strong, healthy
financial market makes it possible for businesses to access credit and create
new jobs. It channels the savings of families into investments that raise
incomes. But that can only happen if we guard against the same recklessness
that nearly brought down our entire economy.

We need to make sure consumers and middle-class families have the information
they need to make financial decisions. We can't allow financial institutions,
including those that take your deposits, to take risks that threaten the whole
economy.

The House has already passed financial reform with many of these changes. And
the lobbyists are already trying to kill it. Well, we cannot let them win this
fight. And if the bill that ends up on my desk does not meet the test of real
reform, I will send it back.

Next, we need to encourage American innovation. Last year, we made the largest
investment in basic research funding in history -- an investment that could
lead to the world's cheapest solar cells or treatment that kills cancer cells
but leaves healthy ones untouched. And no area is more ripe for such
innovation than energy. You can see the results of last year's investment in
clean energy -- in the North Carolina company that will create 1200 jobs
nationwide helping to make advanced batteries; or in the California business
that will put 1,000 people to work making solar panels.

But to create more of these clean energy jobs, we need more production, more
efficiency, more incentives. That means building a new generation of safe,
clean nuclear power plants in this country. It means making tough decisions
about opening new offshore areas for oil and gas development. It means
continued investment in advanced biofuels and clean coal technologies. And
yes, it means passing a comprehensive energy and climate bill with incentives
that will finally make clean energy the profitable kind of energy in America.

I am grateful to the House for passing such a bill last year. This year, I am
eager to help advance the bipartisan effort in the Senate. I know there have
been questions about whether we can afford such changes in a tough economy;
and I know that there are those who disagree with the overwhelming scientific
evidence on climate change. But even if you doubt the evidence, providing
incentives for energy efficiency and clean energy are the right thing to do
for our future -- because the nation that leads the clean energy economy will
be the nation that leads the global economy. And America must be that nation.

Third, we need to export more of our goods. Because the more products we make
and sell to other countries, the more jobs we support right here in America.
So tonight, we set a new goal: We will double our exports over the next five
years, an increase that will support two million jobs in America. To help meet
this goal, we're launching a National Export Initiative that will help farmers
and small businesses increase their exports, and reform export controls
consistent with national security.

We have to seek new markets aggressively, just as our competitors are. If
America sits on the sidelines while other nations sign trade deals, we will
lose the chance to create jobs on our shores. But realizing those benefits
also means enforcing those agreements so our trading partners play by the
rules. And that's why we will continue to shape a Doha trade agreement that
opens global markets, and why we will strengthen our trade relations in Asia
and with key partners like South Korea, Panama, and Colombia.

Fourth, we need to invest in the skills and education of our people.

This year, we have broken through the stalemate between left and right by
launching a national competition to improve our schools. The idea here is
simple: instead of rewarding failure, we only reward success. Instead of
funding the status quo, we only invest in reform -- reform that raises student
achievement, inspires students to excel in math and science, and turns around
failing schools that steal the future of too many young Americans, from rural
communities to inner-cities. In the 21st century, one of the best anti-poverty
programs is a world-class education. In this country, the success of our
children cannot depend more on where they live than their potential.

When we renew the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, we will work with
Congress to expand these reforms to all fifty states. Still, in this economy,
a high school diploma no longer guarantees a good job. I urge the Senate to
follow the House and pass a bill that will revitalize our community colleges,
which are a career pathway to the children of so many working families. To
make college more affordable, this bill will finally end the unwarranted
taxpayer-subsidies that go to banks for student loans. Instead, let's take
that money and give families a $10,000 tax credit for four years of college
and increase Pell Grants. And let's tell another one million students that
when they graduate, they will be required to pay only ten percent of their
income on student loans, and all of their debt will be forgiven after twenty
years -- and forgiven after ten years if they choose a career in public
service. Because in the United States of America, no one should go broke
because they chose to go to college. And it's time for colleges and
universities to get serious about cutting their own costs -- because they too
have a responsibility to help solve this problem.

Now, the price of college tuition is just one of the burdens facing the
middle-class. That's why last year I asked Vice President Biden to chair a
task force on Middle-Class Families. That's why we're nearly doubling the
child care tax credit, and making it easier to save for retirement by giving
every worker access to a retirement account and expanding the tax credit for
those who start a nest egg. That's why we're working to lift the value of a
family's single largest investment -- their home. The steps we took last year
to shore up the housing market have allowed millions of Americans to take out
new loans and save an average of $1,500 on mortgage payments. This year, we
will step up re-financing so that homeowners can move into more affordable
mortgages. And it is precisely to relieve the burden on middle-class families
that we still need health insurance reform.

Now let's be clear -- I did not choose to tackle this issue to get some
legislative victory under my belt. And by now it should be fairly obvious that
I didn't take on health care because it was good politics.

I took on health care because of the stories I've heard from Americans with
pre-existing conditions whose lives depend on getting coverage; patients
who've been denied coverage; and families -- even those with insurance -- who
are just one illness away from financial ruin.

After nearly a century of trying, we are closer than ever to bringing more
security to the lives of so many Americans. The approach we've taken would
protect every American from the worst practices of the insurance industry. It
would give small businesses and uninsured Americans a chance to choose an
affordable health care plan in a competitive market. It would require every
insurance plan to cover preventive care. And by the way, I want to acknowledge
our First Lady, Michelle Obama, who this year is creating a national movement
to tackle the epidemic of childhood obesity and make our kids healthier.

Our approach would preserve the right of Americans who have insurance to keep
their doctor and their plan. It would reduce costs and premiums for millions
of families and businesses. And according to the Congressional Budget Office
-- the independent organization that both parties have cited as the official
scorekeeper for Congress -- our approach would bring down the deficit by as
much as $1 trillion over the next two decades.

Still, this is a complex issue, and the longer it was debated, the more
skeptical people became. I take my share of the blame for not explaining it
more clearly to the American people. And I know that with all the lobbying and
horse-trading, this process left most Americans wondering what's in it for
them.

But I also know this problem is not going away. By the time I'm finished
speaking tonight, more Americans will have lost their health insurance.
Millions will lose it this year. Our deficit will grow. Premiums will go up.
Patients will be denied the care they need. Small business owners will
continue to drop coverage altogether. I will not walk away from these
Americans, and neither should the people in this chamber.

As temperatures cool, I want everyone to take another look at the plan we've
proposed. There's a reason why many doctors, nurses, and health care experts
who know our system best consider this approach a vast improvement over the
status quo. But if anyone from either party has a better approach that will
bring down premiums, bring down the deficit, cover the uninsured, strengthen
Medicare for seniors, and stop insurance company abuses, let me know. Here's
what I ask of Congress, though: Do not walk away from reform. Not now. Not
when we are so close. Let us find a way to come together and finish the job
for the American people.

Now, even as health care reform would reduce our deficit, it's not enough to
dig us out of a massive fiscal hole in which we find ourselves. It's a
challenge that makes all others that much harder to solve, and one that's been
subject to a lot of political posturing.

So let me start the discussion of government spending by setting the record
straight. At the beginning of the last decade, America had a budget surplus of
over $200 billion. By the time I took office, we had a one year deficit of
over $1 trillion and projected deficits of $8 trillion over the next decade.
Most of this was the result of not paying for two wars, two tax cuts, and an
expensive prescription drug program. On top of that, the effects of the
recession put a $3 trillion hole in our budget. That was before I walked in
the door.

Now if we had taken office in ordinary times, I would have liked nothing more
than to start bringing down the deficit. But we took office amid a crisis, and
our efforts to prevent a second Depression have added another $1 trillion to
our national debt.

I am absolutely convinced that was the right thing to do. But families across
the country are tightening their belts and making tough decisions. The federal
government should do the same. So tonight, I'm proposing specific steps to pay
for the $1 trillion that it took to rescue the economy last year.

Starting in 2011, we are prepared to freeze government spending for three
years. Spending related to our national security, Medicare, Medicaid, and
Social Security will not be affected. But all other discretionary government
programs will. Like any cash-strapped family, we will work within a budget to
invest in what we need and sacrifice what we don't. And if I have to enforce
this discipline by veto, I will.

We will continue to go through the budget line by line to eliminate programs
that we can't afford and don't work. We've already identified $20 billion in
savings for next year. To help working families, we will extend our
middle-class tax cuts. But at a time of record deficits, we will not continue
tax cuts for oil companies, investment fund managers, and those making over
$250,000 a year. We just can't afford it.

Now, even after paying for what we spent on my watch, we will still face the
massive deficit we had when I took office. More importantly, the cost of
Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security will continue to skyrocket. That's why
I've called for a bipartisan, Fiscal Commission, modeled on a proposal by
Republican Judd Gregg and Democrat Kent Conrad. This can't be one of those
Washington gimmicks that lets us pretend we solved a problem. The Commission
will have to provide a specific set of solutions by a certain deadline.
Yesterday, the Senate blocked a bill that would have created this commission.
So I will issue an executive order that will allow us to go forward, because I
refuse to pass this problem on to another generation of Americans. And when
the vote comes tomorrow, the Senate should restore the pay-as-you-go law that
was a big reason why we had record surpluses in the 1990s.

I know that some in my own party will argue that we cannot address the deficit
or freeze government spending when so many are still hurting. I agree, which
is why this freeze will not take effect until next year, when the economy is
stronger. But understand -- if we do not take meaningful steps to rein in our
debt, it could damage our markets, increase the cost of borrowing, and
jeopardize our recovery -- all of which could have an even worse effect on our
job growth and family incomes.

From some on the right, I expect we'll hear a different argument  that if we
just make fewer investments in our people, extend tax cuts for wealthier
Americans, eliminate more regulations, and maintain the status quo on health
care, our deficits will go away. The problem is, that's what we did for eight
years. That's what helped lead us into this crisis. It's what helped lead to
these deficits. And we cannot do it again.

Rather than fight the same tired battles that have dominated Washington for
decades, it's time to try something new. Let's invest in our people without
leaving them a mountain of debt. Let's meet our responsibility to the citizens
who sent us here. Let's try common sense.

To do that, we have to recognize that we face more than a deficit of dollars
right now. We face a deficit of trust  deep and corrosive doubts about how
Washington works that have been growing for years. To close that credibility
gap we must take action on both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue to end the
outsized influence of lobbyists; to do our work openly; and to give our people
the government they deserve.

That's what I came to Washington to do. That's why  for the first time in
history  my Administration posts our White House visitors online. And that's
why we've excluded lobbyists from policy-making jobs or seats on federal
boards and commissions.

But we can't stop there. It's time to require lobbyists to disclose each
contact they make on behalf of a client with my Administration or Congress.
And it's time to put strict limits on the contributions that lobbyists give to
candidates for federal office. Last week, the Supreme Court reversed a century
of law to open the floodgates for special interests  including foreign
corporations  to spend without limit in our elections. Well I don't think
American elections should be bankrolled by America's most powerful interests,
or worse, by foreign entities. They should be decided by the American people,
and that's why I'm urging Democrats and Republicans to pass a bill that helps
to right this wrong.

I'm also calling on Congress to continue down the path of earmark reform. You
have trimmed some of this spending and embraced some meaningful change. But
restoring the public trust demands more. For example, some members of Congress
post some earmark requests online. Tonight, I'm calling on Congress to publish
all earmark requests on a single website before there's a vote so that the
American people can see how their money is being spent.

Of course, none of these reforms will even happen if we don't also reform how
we work with one another.

Now, I am not nave. I never thought the mere fact of my election would usher
in peace, harmony, and some post-partisan era. I knew that both parties have
fed divisions that are deeply entrenched. And on some issues, there are simply
philosophical differences that will always cause us to part ways. These
disagreements, about the role of government in our lives, about our national
priorities and our national security, have been taking place for over two
hundred years. They are the very essence of our democracy.

But what frustrates the American people is a Washington where every day is
Election Day. We cannot wage a perpetual campaign where the only goal is to
see who can get the most embarrassing headlines about their opponent  a belief
that if you lose, I win. Neither party should delay or obstruct every single
bill just because they can. The confirmation of well-qualified public servants
should not be held hostage to the pet projects or grudges of a few individual
Senators. Washington may think that saying anything about the other side, no
matter how false, is just part of the game. But it is precisely such politics
that has stopped either party from helping the American people. Worse yet, it
is sowing further division among our citizens and further distrust in our
government.

So no, I will not give up on changing the tone of our politics. I know it's an
election year. And after last week, it is clear that campaign fever has come
even earlier than usual. But we still need to govern. To Democrats, I would
remind you that we still have the largest majority in decades, and the people
expect us to solve some problems, not run for the hills. And if the Republican
leadership is going to insist that sixty votes in the Senate are required to
do any business at all in this town, then the responsibility to govern is now
yours as well. Just saying no to everything may be good short-term politics,
but it's not leadership. We were sent here to serve our citizens, not our
ambitions. So let's show the American people that we can do it together. This
week, I'll be addressing a meeting of the House Republicans. And I would like
to begin monthly meetings with both the Democratic and Republican leadership.
I know you can't wait.

Throughout our history, no issue has united this country more than our
security. Sadly, some of the unity we felt after 9/11 has dissipated. We can
argue all we want about who's to blame for this, but I am not interested in
re-litigating the past. I know that all of us love this country. All of us are
committed to its defense. So let's put aside the schoolyard taunts about who
is tough. Let's reject the false choice between protecting our people and
upholding our values. Let's leave behind the fear and division, and do what it
takes to defend our nation and forge a more hopeful future  for America and
the world.

That is the work we began last year. Since the day I took office, we have
renewed our focus on the terrorists who threaten our nation. We have made
substantial investments in our homeland security and disrupted plots that
threatened to take American lives. We are filling unacceptable gaps revealed
by the failed Christmas attack, with better airline security, and swifter
action on our intelligence. We have prohibited torture and strengthened
partnerships from the Pacific to South Asia to the Arabian Peninsula. And in
the last year, hundreds of Al Qaeda's fighters and affiliates, including many
senior leaders, have been captured or killed  far more than in 2008.

In Afghanistan, we are increasing our troops and training Afghan Security
Forces so they can begin to take the lead in July of 2011, and our troops can
begin to come home. We will reward good governance, reduce corruption, and
support the rights of all Afghans  men and women alike. We are joined by
allies and partners who have increased their own commitment, and who will come
together tomorrow in London to reaffirm our common purpose. There will be
difficult days ahead. But I am confident we will succeed.

As we take the fight to al Qaeda, we are responsibly leaving Iraq to its
people. As a candidate, I promised that I would end this war, and that is what
I am doing as President. We will have all of our combat troops out of Iraq by
the end of this August. We will support the Iraqi government as they hold
elections, and continue to partner with the Iraqi people to promote regional
peace and prosperity. But make no mistake: this war is ending, and all of our
troops are coming home.

Tonight, all of our men and women in uniform -- in Iraq, Afghanistan, and
around the world  must know that they have our respect, our gratitude, and our
full support. And just as they must have the resources they need in war, we
all have a responsibility to support them when they come home. That is why we
made the largest increase in investments for veterans in decades. That is why
we are building a 21st century VA. And that is why Michelle has joined with
Jill Biden to forge a national commitment to support military families.

Even as we prosecute two wars, we are also confronting perhaps the greatest
danger to the American people  the threat of nuclear weapons. I have embraced
the vision of John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan through a strategy that
reverses the spread of these weapons, and seeks a world without them. To
reduce our stockpiles and launchers, while ensuring our deterrent, the United
States and Russia are completing negotiations on the farthest-reaching arms
control treaty in nearly two decades. And at April's Nuclear Security Summit,
we will bring forty-four nations together behind a clear goal: securing all
vulnerable nuclear materials around the world in four years, so that they
never fall into the hands of terrorists.

These diplomatic efforts have also strengthened our hand in dealing with those
nations that insist on violating international agreements in pursuit of these
weapons. That is why North Korea now faces increased isolation, and stronger
sanctions  sanctions that are being vigorously enforced. That is why the
international community is more united, and the Islamic Republic of Iran is
more isolated. And as Iran's leaders continue to ignore their obligations,
there should be no doubt: they, too, will face growing consequences.

That is the leadership that we are providing  engagement that advances the
common security and prosperity of all people. We are working through the G-20
to sustain a lasting global recovery. We are working with Muslim communities
around the world to promote science, education and innovation. We have gone
from a bystander to a leader in the fight against climate change. We are
helping developing countries to feed themselves, and continuing the fight
against HIV/AIDS. And we are launching a new initiative that will give us the
capacity to respond faster and more effectively to bio-terrorism or an
infectious disease  a plan that will counter threats at home, and strengthen
public health abroad.

As we have for over sixty years, America takes these actions because our
destiny is connected to those beyond our shores. But we also do it because it
is right. That is why, as we meet here tonight, over 10,000 Americans are
working with many nations to help the people of Haiti recover and rebuild.
That is why we stand with the girl who yearns to go to school in Afghanistan;
we support the human rights of the women marching through the streets of Iran;
and we advocate for the young man denied a job by corruption in Guinea. For
America must always stand on the side of freedom and human dignity.

Abroad, America's greatest source of strength has always been our ideals. The
same is true at home. We find unity in our incredible diversity, drawing on
the promise enshrined in our Constitution: the notion that we are all created
equal, that no matter who you are or what you look like, if you abide by the
law you should be protected by it; that if you adhere to our common values you
should be treated no different than anyone else.

We must continually renew this promise. My Administration has a Civil Rights
Division that is once again prosecuting civil rights violations and employment
discrimination. We finally strengthened our laws to protect against crimes
driven by hate. This year, I will work with Congress and our military to
finally repeal the law that denies gay Americans the right to serve the
country they love because of who they are. We are going to crack down on
violations of equal pay laws  so that women get equal pay for an equal day's
work. And we should continue the work of fixing our broken immigration system 
to secure our borders, enforce our laws, and ensure that everyone who plays by
the rules can contribute to our economy and enrich our nations.

In the end, it is our ideals, our values, that built America  values that
allowed us to forge a nation made up of immigrants from every corner of the
globe; values that drive our citizens still. Every day, Americans meet their
responsibilities to their families and their employers. Time and again, they
lend a hand to their neighbors and give back to their country. They take pride
in their labor, and are generous in spirit. These aren't Republican values or
Democratic values they're living by; business values or labor values. They are
American values.

Unfortunately, too many of our citizens have lost faith that our biggest
institutions  our corporations, our media, and yes, our government  still
reflect these same values. Each of these institutions are full of honorable
men and women doing important work that helps our country prosper. But each
time a CEO rewards himself for failure, or a banker puts the rest of us at
risk for his own selfish gain, people's doubts grow. Each time lobbyists game
the system or politicians tear each other down instead of lifting this country
up, we lose faith. The more that TV pundits reduce serious debates into silly
arguments, and big issues into sound bites, our citizens turn away.

No wonder there's so much cynicism out there.

No wonder there's so much disappointment.

I campaigned on the promise of change  change we can believe in, the slogan
went. And right now, I know there are many Americans who aren't sure if they
still believe we can change  or at least, that I can deliver it.

But remember this  I never suggested that change would be easy, or that I can
do it alone. Democracy in a nation of three hundred million people can be
noisy and messy and complicated. And when you try to do big things and make
big changes, it stirs passions and controversy. That's just how it is.

Those of us in public office can respond to this reality by playing it safe
and avoid telling hard truths. We can do what's necessary to keep our poll
numbers high, and get through the next election instead of doing what's best
for the next generation.

But I also know this: if people had made that decision fifty years ago or one
hundred years ago or two hundred years ago, we wouldn't be here tonight. The
only reason we are is because generations of Americans were unafraid to do
what was hard; to do what was needed even when success was uncertain; to do
what it took to keep the dream of this nation alive for their children and
grandchildren.

Our administration has had some political setbacks this year, and some of them
were deserved. But I wake up every day knowing that they are nothing compared
to the setbacks that families all across this country have faced this year.
And what keeps me going  what keeps me fighting  is that despite all these
setbacks, that spirit of determination and optimism  that fundamental decency
that has always been at the core of the American people  lives on.

It lives on in the struggling small business owner who wrote to me of his
company, "None of us," he said, "are willing to consider, even slightly, that
we might fail."

It lives on in the woman who said that even though she and her neighbors have
felt the pain of recession, "We are strong. We are resilient. We are
American."

It lives on in the 8-year old boy in Louisiana, who just sent me his allowance
and asked if I would give it to the people of Haiti. And it lives on in all
the Americans who've dropped everything to go some place they've never been
and pull people they've never known from rubble, prompting chants of "U.S.A.!
U.S.A.! U.S.A!" when another life was saved.

The spirit that has sustained this nation for more than two centuries lives on
in you, its people.

We have finished a difficult year. We have come through a difficult decade.
But a new year has come. A new decade stretches before us. We don't quit. I
don't quit. Let's seize this moment  to start anew, to carry the dream
forward, and to strengthen our union once more.

Thank you. God Bless You. And God Bless the United States of America. 

***

State of the Union Address
Barack Obama 
January 25, 2011

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, distinguished guests,
and fellow Americans:

Tonight I want to begin by congratulating the men and women of the 112th
Congress, as well as your new Speaker, John Boehner.  And as we mark this
occasion, we're also mindful of the empty chair in this chamber, and we pray
for the health of our colleague -- and our friend - Gabby Giffords.

It's no secret that those of us here tonight have had our differences over the
last two years. The debates have been contentious; we have fought fiercely for
our beliefs. And that's a good thing. That's what a robust democracy demands.
That's what helps set us apart as a nation.

But there's a reason the tragedy in Tucson gave us pause. Amid all the noise
and passion and rancor of our public debate, Tucson reminded us that no matter
who we are or where we come from, each of us is a part of something greater -
something more consequential than party or political preference.

We are part of the American family. We believe that in a country where every
race and faith and point of view can be found, we are still bound together as
one people; that we share common hopes and a common creed; that the dreams of
a little girl in Tucson are not so different than those of our own children,
and that they all deserve the chance to be fulfilled.

That, too, is what sets us apart as a nation.

Now, by itself, this simple recognition won't usher in a new era of
cooperation. What comes of this moment is up to us. What comes of this moment
will be determined not by whether we can sit together tonight, but whether we
can work together tomorrow.

I believe we can. And I believe we must. That's what the people who sent us
here expect of us. With their votes, they've determined that governing will
now be a shared responsibility between parties. New laws will only pass with
support from Democrats and Republicans. We will move forward together, or not
at all - for the challenges we face are bigger than party, and bigger than
politics.

At stake right now is not who wins the next election - after all, we just had
an election. At stake is whether new jobs and industries take root in this
country, or somewhere else. It's whether the hard work and industry of our
people is rewarded. It's whether we sustain the leadership that has made
America not just a place on a map, but the light to the world.

We are poised for progress. Two years after the worst recession most of us
have ever known, the stock market has come roaring back. Corporate profits are
up. The economy is growing again.

But we have never measured progress by these yardsticks alone. We measure
progress by the success of our people. By the jobs they can find and the
quality of life those jobs offer. By the prospects of a small business owner
who dreams of turning a good idea into a thriving enterprise. By the
opportunities for a better life that we pass on to our children.

That's the project the American people want us to work on. Together.

We did that in December. Thanks to the tax cuts we passed, Americans'
paychecks are a little bigger today. Every business can write off the full
cost of new investments that they make this year. And these steps, taken by
Democrats and Republicans, will grow the economy and add to the more than one
million private sector jobs created last year.

But we have to do more. These steps we've taken over the last two years may
have broken the back of this recession, but to win the future, we'll need to
take on challenges that have been decades in the making.

Many people watching tonight can probably remember a time when finding a good
job meant showing up at a nearby factory or a business downtown. You didn't
always need a degree, and your competition was pretty much limited to your
neighbors. If you worked hard, chances are you'd have a job for life, with a
decent paycheck and good benefits and the occasional promotion. Maybe you'd
even have the pride of seeing your kids work at the same company.

That world has changed. And for many, the change has been painful. I've seen
it in the shuttered windows of once booming factories, and the vacant
storefronts on once busy Main Streets. I've heard it in the frustrations of
Americans who've seen their paychecks dwindle or their jobs disappear - proud
men and women who feel like the rules have been changed in the middle of the
game.

They're right. The rules have changed. In a single generation, revolutions in
technology have transformed the way we live, work and do business. Steel mills
that once needed 1,000 workers can now do the same work with 100. Today, just
about any company can set up shop, hire workers, and sell their products
wherever there's an Internet connection.

Meanwhile, nations like China and India realized that with some changes of
their own, they could compete in this new world. And so they started educating
their children earlier and longer, with greater emphasis on math and science.
They're investing in research and new technologies. Just recently, China
became the home to the world's largest private solar research facility, and
the world's fastest computer.

So, yes, the world has changed. The competition for jobs is real. But this
shouldn't discourage us. It should challenge us. Remember - for all the hits
we've taken these last few years, for all the naysayers predicting our
decline, America still has the largest, most prosperous economy in the world. 
No workers -- no workers are more productive than ours. No country has more
successful companies, or grants more patents to inventors and entrepreneurs.
We're the home to the world's best colleges and universities, where more
students come to study than any place on Earth.

What's more, we are the first nation to be founded for the sake of an idea -
the idea that each of us deserves the chance to shape our own destiny. That's
why centuries of pioneers and immigrants have risked everything to come here.
It's why our students don't just memorize equations, but answer questions like
"What do you think of that idea? What would you change about the world? What
do you want to be when you grow up?"

The future is ours to win. But to get there, we can't just stand still. As
Robert Kennedy told us, "The future is not a gift. It is an achievement."
Sustaining the American Dream has never been about standing pat. It has
required each generation to sacrifice, and struggle, and meet the demands of a
new age.

And now it's our turn. We know what it takes to compete for the jobs and
industries of our time. We need to out-innovate, out-educate, and out-build
the rest of the world.  We have to make America the best place on Earth to do
business. We need to take responsibility for our deficit and reform our
government. That's how our people will prosper. That's how we'll win the
future.  And tonight, I'd like to talk about how we get there.

The first step in winning the future is encouraging American innovation. None
of us can predict with certainty what the next big industry will be or where
the new jobs will come from. Thirty years ago, we couldn't know that something
called the Internet would lead to an economic revolution. What we can do --
what America does better than anyone else -- is spark the creativity and
imagination of our people. We're the nation that put cars in driveways and
computers in offices; the nation of Edison and the Wright brothers; of Google
and Facebook. In America, innovation doesn't just change our lives. It is how
we make our living.

Our free enterprise system is what drives innovation. But because it's not
always profitable for companies to invest in basic research, throughout our
history, our government has provided cutting-edge scientists and inventors
with the support that they need. That's what planted the seeds for the
Internet. That's what helped make possible things like computer chips and GPS.
Just think of all the good jobs -- from manufacturing to retail -- that have
come from these breakthroughs.

Half a century ago, when the Soviets beat us into space with the launch of a
satellite called Sputnik, we had no idea how we would beat them to the moon.
The science wasn't even there yet. NASA didn't exist. But after investing in
better research and education, we didn't just surpass the Soviets; we
unleashed a wave of innovation that created new industries and millions of new
jobs.

This is our generation's Sputnik moment. Two years ago, I said that we needed
to reach a level of research and development we haven't seen since the height
of the Space Race. And in a few weeks, I will be sending a budget to Congress
that helps us meet that goal. We'll invest in biomedical research, information
technology, and especially clean energy technology -  -- an investment that
will strengthen our security, protect our planet, and create countless new
jobs for our people.

Already, we're seeing the promise of renewable energy. Robert and Gary Allen
are brothers who run a small Michigan roofing company. After September 11th,
they volunteered their best roofers to help repair the Pentagon. But half of
their factory went unused, and the recession hit them hard. Today, with the
help of a government loan, that empty space is being used to manufacture solar
shingles that are being sold all across the country. In Robert's words, "We
reinvented ourselves."

That's what Americans have done for over 200 years: reinvented ourselves. And
to spur on more success stories like the Allen Brothers, we've begun to
reinvent our energy policy. We're not just handing out money. We're issuing a
challenge. We're telling America's scientists and engineers that if they
assemble teams of the best minds in their fields, and focus on the hardest
problems in clean energy, we'll fund the Apollo projects of our time.

At the California Institute of Technology, they're developing a way to turn
sunlight and water into fuel for our cars. At Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
they're using supercomputers to get a lot more power out of our nuclear
facilities. With more research and incentives, we can break our dependence on
oil with biofuels, and become the first country to have a million electric
vehicles on the road by 2015.

We need to get behind this innovation. And to help pay for it, I'm asking
Congress to eliminate the billions in taxpayer dollars we currently give to
oil companies.  I don't know if -- I don't know if you've noticed, but they're
doing just fine on their own.  So instead of subsidizing yesterday's energy,
let's invest in tomorrow's.

Now, clean energy breakthroughs will only translate into clean energy jobs if
businesses know there will be a market for what they're selling. So tonight, I
challenge you to join me in setting a new goal: By 2035, 80 percent of
America's electricity will come from clean energy sources.

Some folks want wind and solar. Others want nuclear, clean coal and natural
gas. To meet this goal, we will need them all -- and I urge Democrats and
Republicans to work together to make it happen.

Maintaining our leadership in research and technology is crucial to America's
success. But if we want to win the future - if we want innovation to produce
jobs in America and not overseas - then we also have to win the race to
educate our kids.

Think about it. Over the next 10 years, nearly half of all new jobs will
require education that goes beyond a high school education. And yet, as many
as a quarter of our students aren't even finishing high school. The quality of
our math and science education lags behind many other nations. America has
fallen to ninth in the proportion of young people with a college degree. And
so the question is whether all of us - as citizens, and as parents - are
willing to do what's necessary to give every child a chance to succeed.

That responsibility begins not in our classrooms, but in our homes and
communities. It's family that first instills the love of learning in a child.
Only parents can make sure the TV is turned off and homework gets done. We
need to teach our kids that it's not just the winner of the Super Bowl who
deserves to be celebrated, but the winner of the science fair.  We need to
teach them that success is not a function of fame or PR, but of hard work and
discipline.

Our schools share this responsibility. When a child walks into a classroom, it
should be a place of high expectations and high performance. But too many
schools don't meet this test. That's why instead of just pouring money into a
system that's not working, we launched a competition called Race to the Top.
To all 50 states, we said, "If you show us the most innovative plans to
improve teacher quality and student achievement, we'll show you the money."

Race to the Top is the most meaningful reform of our public schools in a
generation. For less than 1 percent of what we spend on education each year,
it has led over 40 states to raise their standards for teaching and learning.
And these standards were developed, by the way, not by Washington, but by
Republican and Democratic governors throughout the country. And Race to the
Top should be the approach we follow this year as we replace No Child Left
Behind with a law that's more flexible and focused on what's best for our
kids.

You see, we know what's possible from our children when reform isn't just a
top-down mandate, but the work of local teachers and principals, school boards
and communities. Take a school like Bruce Randolph in Denver. Three years ago,
it was rated one of the worst schools in Colorado -- located on turf between
two rival gangs. But last May, 97 percent of the seniors received their
diploma. Most will be the first in their families to go to college. And after
the first year of the school's transformation, the principal who made it
possible wiped away tears when a student said, "Thank you, Ms. Waters, for
showing that we are smart and we can make it."  That's what good schools can
do, and we want good schools all across the country.

Let's also remember that after parents, the biggest impact on a child's
success comes from the man or woman at the front of the classroom. In South
Korea, teachers are known as "nation builders." Here in America, it's time we
treated the people who educate our children with the same level of respect. 
We want to reward good teachers and stop making excuses for bad ones.  And
over the next 10 years, with so many baby boomers retiring from our
classrooms, we want to prepare 100,000 new teachers in the fields of science
and technology and engineering and math.

In fact, to every young person listening tonight who's contemplating their
career choice: If you want to make a difference in the life of our nation; if
you want to make a difference in the life of a child -- become a teacher. Your
country needs you.

Of course, the education race doesn't end with a high school diploma. To
compete, higher education must be within the reach of every American.  That's
why we've ended the unwarranted taxpayer subsidies that went to banks, and
used the savings to make college affordable for millions of students.  And
this year, I ask Congress to go further, and make permanent our tuition tax
credit - worth $10,000 for four years of college. It's the right thing to do.

Because people need to be able to train for new jobs and careers in today's
fast-changing economy, we're also revitalizing America's community colleges.
Last month, I saw the promise of these schools at Forsyth Tech in North
Carolina. Many of the students there used to work in the surrounding factories
that have since left town. One mother of two, a woman named Kathy Proctor, had
worked in the furniture industry since she was 18 years old. And she told me
she's earning her degree in biotechnology now, at 55 years old, not just
because the furniture jobs are gone, but because she wants to inspire her
children to pursue their dreams, too. As Kathy said, "I hope it tells them to
never give up."

If we take these steps - if we raise expectations for every child, and give
them the best possible chance at an education, from the day they are born
until the last job they take - we will reach the goal that I set two years
ago: By the end of the decade, America will once again have the highest
proportion of college graduates in the world.

One last point about education. Today, there are hundreds of thousands of
students excelling in our schools who are not American citizens. Some are the
children of undocumented workers, who had nothing to do with the actions of
their parents. They grew up as Americans and pledge allegiance to our flag,
and yet they live every day with the threat of deportation. Others come here
from abroad to study in our colleges and universities. But as soon as they
obtain advanced degrees, we send them back home to compete against us. It
makes no sense.

Now, I strongly believe that we should take on, once and for all, the issue of
illegal immigration. And I am prepared to work with Republicans and Democrats
to protect our borders, enforce our laws and address the millions of
undocumented workers who are now living in the shadows.  I know that debate
will be difficult. I know it will take time. But tonight, let's agree to make
that effort. And let's stop expelling talented, responsible young people who
could be staffing our research labs or starting a new business, who could be
further enriching this nation.

The third step in winning the future is rebuilding America. To attract new
businesses to our shores, we need the fastest, most reliable ways to move
people, goods, and information -- from high-speed rail to high-speed Internet.

Our infrastructure used to be the best, but our lead has slipped. South Korean
homes now have greater Internet access than we do. Countries in Europe and
Russia invest more in their roads and railways than we do. China is building
faster trains and newer airports. Meanwhile, when our own engineers graded our
nation's infrastructure, they gave us a "D."

We have to do better. America is the nation that built the transcontinental
railroad, brought electricity to rural communities, constructed the Interstate
Highway System. The jobs created by these projects didn't just come from
laying down track or pavement. They came from businesses that opened near a
town's new train station or the new off-ramp.

So over the last two years, we've begun rebuilding for the 21st century, a
project that has meant thousands of good jobs for the hard-hit construction
industry. And tonight, I'm proposing that we redouble those efforts.

We'll put more Americans to work repairing crumbling roads and bridges. We'll
make sure this is fully paid for, attract private investment, and pick
projects based [on] what's best for the economy, not politicians.

Within 25 years, our goal is to give 80 percent of Americans access to
high-speed rail.  This could allow you to go places in half the time it takes
to travel by car. For some trips, it will be faster than flying - without the
pat-down.  As we speak, routes in California and the Midwest are already
underway.

Within the next five years, we'll make it possible for businesses to deploy
the next generation of high-speed wireless coverage to 98 percent of all
Americans. This isn't just about --  -- this isn't about faster Internet or
fewer dropped calls. It's about connecting every part of America to the
digital age. It's about a rural community in Iowa or Alabama where farmers and
small business owners will be able to sell their products all over the world.
It's about a firefighter who can download the design of a burning building
onto a handheld device; a student who can take classes with a digital
textbook; or a patient who can have face-to-face video chats with her doctor.

All these investments - in innovation, education, and infrastructure - will
make America a better place to do business and create jobs. But to help our
companies compete, we also have to knock down barriers that stand in the way
of their success.

For example, over the years, a parade of lobbyists has rigged the tax code to
benefit particular companies and industries. Those with accountants or lawyers
to work the system can end up paying no taxes at all. But all the rest are hit
with one of the highest corporate tax rates in the world. It makes no sense,
and it has to change.

So tonight, I'm asking Democrats and Republicans to simplify the system. Get
rid of the loopholes. Level the playing field. And use the savings to lower
the corporate tax rate for the first time in 25 years - without adding to our
deficit. It can be done.

To help businesses sell more products abroad, we set a goal of doubling our
exports by 2014 - because the more we export, the more jobs we create here at
home. Already, our exports are up. Recently, we signed agreements with India
and China that will support more than 250,000 jobs here in the United States.
And last month, we finalized a trade agreement with South Korea that will
support at least 70,000 American jobs. This agreement has unprecedented
support from business and labor, Democrats and Republicans -- and I ask this
Congress to pass it as soon as possible.

Now, before I took office, I made it clear that we would enforce our trade
agreements, and that I would only sign deals that keep faith with American
workers and promote American jobs. That's what we did with Korea, and that's
what I intend to do as we pursue agreements with Panama and Colombia and
continue our Asia Pacific and global trade talks.

To reduce barriers to growth and investment, I've ordered a review of
government regulations. When we find rules that put an unnecessary burden on
businesses, we will fix them.  But I will not hesitate to create or enforce
common-sense safeguards to protect the American people.  That's what we've
done in this country for more than a century. It's why our food is safe to
eat, our water is safe to drink, and our air is safe to breathe. It's why we
have speed limits and child labor laws. It's why last year, we put in place
consumer protections against hidden fees and penalties by credit card
companies and new rules to prevent another financial crisis.  And it's why we
passed reform that finally prevents the health insurance industry from
exploiting patients.

Now, I have heard rumors that a few of you still have concerns about our new
health care law.  So let me be the first to say that anything can be improved.
If you have ideas about how to improve this law by making care better or more
affordable, I am eager to work with you. We can start right now by correcting
a flaw in the legislation that has placed an unnecessary bookkeeping burden on
small businesses.

What I'm not willing to do -- what I'm not willing to do is go back to the
days when insurance companies could deny someone coverage because of a
preexisting condition.

I'm not willing to tell James Howard, a brain cancer patient from Texas, that
his treatment might not be covered. I'm not willing to tell Jim Houser, a
small business man from Oregon, that he has to go back to paying $5,000 more
to cover his employees. As we speak, this law is making prescription drugs
cheaper for seniors and giving uninsured students a chance to stay on their
patients' -- parents' coverage.

So I say to this chamber tonight, instead of re-fighting the battles of the
last two years, let's fix what needs fixing and let's move forward.

Now, the final critical step in winning the future is to make sure we aren't
buried under a mountain of debt.

We are living with a legacy of deficit spending that began almost a decade
ago. And in the wake of the financial crisis, some of that was necessary to
keep credit flowing, save jobs, and put money in people's pockets.

But now that the worst of the recession is over, we have to confront the fact
that our government spends more than it takes in. That is not sustainable.
Every day, families sacrifice to live within their means. They deserve a
government that does the same.

So tonight, I am proposing that starting this year, we freeze annual domestic
spending for the next five years.  Now, this would reduce the deficit by more
than $400 billion over the next decade, and will bring discretionary spending
to the lowest share of our economy since Dwight Eisenhower was President.

This freeze will require painful cuts. Already, we've frozen the salaries of
hardworking federal employees for the next two years. I've proposed cuts to
things I care deeply about, like community action programs. The Secretary of
Defense has also agreed to cut tens of billions of dollars in spending that he
and his generals believe our military can do without.

I recognize that some in this chamber have already proposed deeper cuts, and
I'm willing to eliminate whatever we can honestly afford to do without. But
let's make sure that we're not doing it on the backs of our most vulnerable
citizens.  And let's make sure that what we're cutting is really excess
weight. Cutting the deficit by gutting our investments in innovation and
education is like lightening an overloaded airplane by removing its engine. It
may make you feel like you're flying high at first, but it won't take long
before you feel the impact.

Now, most of the cuts and savings I've proposed only address annual domestic
spending, which represents a little more than 12 percent of our budget. To
make further progress, we have to stop pretending that cutting this kind of
spending alone will be enough. It won't.

The bipartisan fiscal commission I created last year made this crystal clear.
I don't agree with all their proposals, but they made important progress. And
their conclusion is that the only way to tackle our deficit is to cut
excessive spending wherever we find it - in domestic spending, defense
spending, health care spending, and spending through tax breaks and loopholes.

This means further reducing health care costs, including programs like
Medicare and Medicaid, which are the single biggest contributor to our
long-term deficit. The health insurance law we passed last year will slow
these rising costs, which is part of the reason that nonpartisan economists
have said that repealing the health care law would add a quarter of a trillion
dollars to our deficit. Still, I'm willing to look at other ideas to bring
down costs, including one that Republicans suggested last year -- medical
malpractice reform to rein in frivolous lawsuits.

To put us on solid ground, we should also find a bipartisan solution to
strengthen Social Security for future generations.  We must do it without
putting at risk current retirees, the most vulnerable, or people with
disabilities; without slashing benefits for future generations; and without
subjecting Americans' guaranteed retirement income to the whims of the stock
market.

And if we truly care about our deficit, we simply can't afford a permanent
extension of the tax cuts for the wealthiest 2 percent of Americans.  Before
we take money away from our schools or scholarships away from our students, we
should ask millionaires to give up their tax break. It's not a matter of
punishing their success. It's about promoting America's success.

In fact, the best thing we could do on taxes for all Americans is to simplify
the individual tax code.  This will be a tough job, but members of both
parties have expressed an interest in doing this, and I am prepared to join
them.

So now is the time to act. Now is the time for both sides and both houses of
Congress - Democrats and Republicans - to forge a principled compromise that
gets the job done. If we make the hard choices now to rein in our deficits, we
can make the investments we need to win the future.

Let me take this one step further. We shouldn't just give our people a
government that's more affordable. We should give them a government that's
more competent and more efficient. We can't win the future with a government
of the past.

***

State of the Union Address Barack Obama January 25, 2011

We live and do business in the Information Age, but the last major
reorganization of the government happened in the age of black-and-white TV.
There are 12 different agencies that deal with exports. There are at least
five different agencies that deal with housing policy. Then there's my
favorite example: The Interior Department is in charge of salmon while they're
in fresh water, but the Commerce Department handles them when they're in
saltwater.  I hear it gets even more complicated once they're smoked.

Now, we've made great strides over the last two years in using technology and
getting rid of waste. Veterans can now download their electronic medical
records with a click of the mouse. We're selling acres of federal office space
that hasn't been used in years, and we'll cut through red tape to get rid of
more. But we need to think bigger. In the coming months, my administration
will develop a proposal to merge, consolidate, and reorganize the federal
government in a way that best serves the goal of a more competitive America. I
will submit that proposal to Congress for a vote - and we will push to get it
passed.

In the coming year, we'll also work to rebuild people's faith in the
institution of government. Because you deserve to know exactly how and where
your tax dollars are being spent, you'll be able to go to a website and get
that information for the very first time in history. Because you deserve to
know when your elected officials are meeting with lobbyists, I ask Congress to
do what the White House has already done -- put that information online. And
because the American people deserve to know that special interests aren't
larding up legislation with pet projects, both parties in Congress should know
this: If a bill comes to my desk with earmarks inside, I will veto it. I will
veto it.

The 21st century government that's open and competent. A government that lives
within its means. An economy that's driven by new skills and new ideas. Our
success in this new and changing world will require reform, responsibility,
and innovation. It will also require us to approach that world with a new
level of engagement in our foreign affairs.

Just as jobs and businesses can now race across borders, so can new threats
and new challenges. No single wall separates East and West. No one rival
superpower is aligned against us.

And so we must defeat determined enemies, wherever they are, and build
coalitions that cut across lines of region and race and religion. And
America's moral example must always shine for all who yearn for freedom and
justice and dignity. And because we've begun this work, tonight we can say
that American leadership has been renewed and America's standing has been
restored.

Look to Iraq, where nearly 100,000 of our brave men and women have left with
their heads held high.  American combat patrols have ended, violence is down,
and a new government has been formed. This year, our civilians will forge a
lasting partnership with the Iraqi people, while we finish the job of bringing
our troops out of Iraq. America's commitment has been kept. The Iraq war is
coming to an end.

Of course, as we speak, al Qaeda and their affiliates continue to plan attacks
against us. Thanks to our intelligence and law enforcement professionals,
we're disrupting plots and securing our cities and skies. And as extremists
try to inspire acts of violence within our borders, we are responding with the
strength of our communities, with respect for the rule of law, and with the
conviction that American Muslims are a part of our American family.

We've also taken the fight to al Qaeda and their allies abroad. In
Afghanistan, our troops have taken Taliban strongholds and trained Afghan
security forces. Our purpose is clear: By preventing the Taliban from
reestablishing a stranglehold over the Afghan people, we will deny al Qaeda
the safe haven that served as a launching pad for 9/11.

Thanks to our heroic troops and civilians, fewer Afghans are under the control
of the insurgency. There will be tough fighting ahead, and the Afghan
government will need to deliver better governance. But we are strengthening
the capacity of the Afghan people and building an enduring partnership with
them. This year, we will work with nearly 50 countries to begin a transition
to an Afghan lead. And this July, we will begin to bring our troops home.

In Pakistan, al Qaeda's leadership is under more pressure than at any point
since 2001. Their leaders and operatives are being removed from the
battlefield. Their safe havens are shrinking. And we've sent a message from
the Afghan border to the Arabian Peninsula to all parts of the globe: We will
not relent, we will not waver, and we will defeat you.

American leadership can also be seen in the effort to secure the worst weapons
of war. Because Republicans and Democrats approved the New START treaty, far
fewer nuclear weapons and launchers will be deployed. Because we rallied the
world, nuclear materials are being locked down on every continent so they
never fall into the hands of terrorists.

Because of a diplomatic effort to insist that Iran meet its obligations, the
Iranian government now faces tougher sanctions, tighter sanctions than ever
before. And on the Korean Peninsula, we stand with our ally South Korea, and
insist that North Korea keeps its commitment to abandon nuclear weapons.

This is just a part of how we're shaping a world that favors peace and
prosperity. With our European allies, we revitalized NATO and increased our
cooperation on everything from counterterrorism to missile defense. We've
reset our relationship with Russia, strengthened Asian alliances, built new
partnerships with nations like India.

This March, I will travel to Brazil, Chile, and El Salvador to forge new
alliances across the Americas. Around the globe, we're standing with those who
take responsibility - helping farmers grow more food, supporting doctors who
care for the sick, and combating the corruption that can rot a society and rob
people of opportunity.

Recent events have shown us that what sets us apart must not just be our power
- it must also be the purpose behind it. In south Sudan - with our
assistance - the people were finally able to vote for independence after
years of war.  Thousands lined up before dawn. People danced in the streets.
One man who lost four of his brothers at war summed up the scene around him:
"This was a battlefield for most of my life," he said. "Now we want to be
free."

And we saw that same desire to be free in Tunisia, where the will of the
people proved more powerful than the writ of a dictator. And tonight, let us
be clear: The United States of America stands with the people of Tunisia, and
supports the democratic aspirations of all people.

We must never forget that the things we've struggled for, and fought for, live
in the hearts of people everywhere. And we must always remember that the
Americans who have borne the greatest burden in this struggle are the men and
women who serve our country.

Tonight, let us speak with one voice in reaffirming that our nation is united
in support of our troops and their families. Let us serve them as well as
they've served us -- by giving them the equipment they need, by providing them
with the care and benefits that they have earned, and by enlisting our
veterans in the great task of building our own nation.

Our troops come from every corner of this country - they're black, white,
Latino, Asian, Native American. They are Christian and Hindu, Jewish and
Muslim. And, yes, we know that some of them are gay. Starting this year, no
American will be forbidden from serving the country they love because of who
they love.  And with that change, I call on all our college campuses to open
their doors to our military recruiters and ROTC. It is time to leave behind
the divisive battles of the past. It is time to move forward as one nation.

We should have no illusions about the work ahead of us. Reforming our schools,
changing the way we use energy, reducing our deficit - none of this will be
easy. All of it will take time. And it will be harder because we will argue
about everything. The costs. The details. The letter of every law.

Of course, some countries don't have this problem. If the central government
wants a railroad, they build a railroad, no matter how many homes get
bulldozed. If they don't want a bad story in the newspaper, it doesn't get
written.

And yet, as contentious and frustrating and messy as our democracy can
sometimes be, I know there isn't a person here who would trade places with any
other nation on Earth.

We may have differences in policy, but we all believe in the rights enshrined
in our Constitution. We may have different opinions, but we believe in the
same promise that says this is a place where you can make it if you try. We
may have different backgrounds, but we believe in the same dream that says
this is a country where anything is possible. No matter who you are. No matter
where you come from.

That dream is why I can stand here before you tonight. That dream is why a
working-class kid from Scranton can sit behind me.  That dream is why someone
who began by sweeping the floors of his father's Cincinnati bar can preside as
Speaker of the House in the greatest nation on Earth.

That dream - that American Dream - is what drove the Allen Brothers to
reinvent their roofing company for a new era. It's what drove those students
at Forsyth Tech to learn a new skill and work towards the future. And that
dream is the story of a small business owner named Brandon Fisher.

Brandon started a company in Berlin, Pennsylvania, that specializes in a new
kind of drilling technology. And one day last summer, he saw the news that
halfway across the world, 33 men were trapped in a Chilean mine, and no one
knew how to save them.

But Brandon thought his company could help. And so he designed a rescue that
would come to be known as Plan B. His employees worked around the clock to
manufacture the necessary drilling equipment. And Brandon left for Chile.

Along with others, he began drilling a 2,000-foot hole into the ground,
working three- or four-hour -- three or four days at a time without any sleep.
Thirty-seven days later, Plan B succeeded, and the miners were rescued.  But
because he didn't want all of the attention, Brandon wasn't there when the
miners emerged. He'd already gone back home, back to work on his next project.

And later, one of his employees said of the rescue, "We proved that Center
Rock is a little company, but we do big things."

We do big things.

From the earliest days of our founding, America has been the story of ordinary
people who dare to dream. That's how we win the future.

We're a nation that says, "I might not have a lot of money, but I have this
great idea for a new company." "I might not come from a family of college
graduates, but I will be the first to get my degree." "I might not know those
people in trouble, but I think I can help them, and I need to try." "I'm not
sure how we'll reach that better place beyond the horizon, but I know we'll
get there. I know we will."

We do big things.

The idea of America endures. Our destiny remains our choice. And tonight, more
than two centuries later, it's because of our people that our future is
hopeful, our journey goes forward, and the state of our union is strong.

Thank you. God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.


***

State of the Union Address
Barack Obama 
January 24, 2012


Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, distinguished guests, and fellow Americans:
Last month, I went to Andrews Air Force Base and welcomed home some of our last troops to serve in Iraq. Together, we offered a final, proud salute to the colors under which more than a million of our fellow citizens fought -- and several thousand gave their lives.
We gather tonight knowing that this generation of heroes has made the United States safer and more respected around the world. For the first time in nine years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq. For the first time in two decades, Osama bin Laden is not a threat to this country. Most of al-Qaeda's top lieutenants have been defeated. The Taliban's momentum has been broken, and some troops in Afghanistan have begun to come home.
These achievements are a testament to the courage, selflessness, and teamwork of America's Armed Forces. At a time when too many of our institutions have let us down, they exceed all expectations. They're not consumed with personal ambition. They don't obsess over their differences. They focus on the mission at hand. They work together.
Imagine what we could accomplish if we followed their example. Think about the America within our reach: A country that leads the world in educating its people. An America that attracts a new generation of high-tech manufacturing and high-paying jobs. A future where we're in control of our own energy, and our security and prosperity aren't so tied to unstable parts of the world. An economy built to last, where hard work pays off, and responsibility is rewarded.
We can do this. I know we can, because we've done it before. At the end of World War II, when another generation of heroes returned home from combat, they built the strongest economy and middle class the world has ever known. My grandfather, a veteran of Patton's Army, got the chance to go to college on the GI Bill. My grandmother, who worked on a bomber assembly line, was part of a workforce that turned out the best products on Earth.
The two of them shared the optimism of a Nation that had triumphed over a depression and fascism. They understood they were part of something larger; that they were contributing to a story of success that every American had a chance to share -- the basic American promise that if you worked hard, you could do well enough to raise a family, own a home, send your kids to college, and put a little away for retirement.
The defining issue of our time is how to keep that promise alive. No challenge is more urgent. No debate is more important. We can either settle for a country where a shrinking number of people do really well, while a growing number of Americans barely get by. Or we can restore an economy where everyone gets a fair shot, everyone does their fair share, and everyone plays by the same set of rules. What's at stake are not Democratic values or Republican values, but American values. We have to reclaim them.
Let's remember how we got here. Long before the recession, jobs and manufacturing began leaving our shores. Technology made businesses more efficient, but also made some jobs obsolete. Folks at the top saw their incomes rise like never before, but most hardworking Americans struggled with costs that were growing, paychecks that weren't, and personal debt that kept piling up.
In 2008, the house of cards collapsed. We learned that mortgages had been sold to people who couldn't afford or understand them. Banks had made huge bets and bonuses with other people's money. Regulators had looked the other way, or didn't have the authority to stop the bad behavior.
It was wrong. It was irresponsible. And it plunged our economy into a crisis that put millions out of work, saddled us with more debt, and left innocent, hard-working Americans holding the bag. In the six months before I took office, we lost nearly four million jobs. And we lost another four million before our policies were in full effect.
Those are the facts. But so are these. In the last 22 months, businesses have created more than three million jobs. Last year, they created the most jobs since 2005. American manufacturers are hiring again, creating jobs for the first time since the late 1990s. Together, we've agreed to cut the deficit by more than $2 trillion. And we've put in place new rules to hold Wall Street accountable, so a crisis like that never happens again.
The state of our Union is getting stronger. And we've come too far to turn back now. As long as I'm President, I will work with anyone in this chamber to build on this momentum. But I intend to fight obstruction with action, and I will oppose any effort to return to the very same policies that brought on this economic crisis in the first place.
No, we will not go back to an economy weakened by outsourcing, bad debt, and phony financial profits. Tonight, I want to speak about how we move forward, and lay out a blueprint for an economy that's built to last -- an economy built on American manufacturing, American energy, skills for American workers, and a renewal of American values.
This blueprint begins with American manufacturing.
On the day I took office, our auto industry was on the verge of collapse. Some even said we should let it die. With a million jobs at stake, I refused to let that happen. In exchange for help, we demanded responsibility. We got workers and automakers to settle their differences. We got the industry to retool and restructure. Today, General Motors is back on top as the world's number one automaker. Chrysler has grown faster in the U.S. than any major car company. Ford is investing billions in U.S. plants and factories. And together, the entire industry added nearly 160,000 jobs.
We bet on American workers. We bet on American ingenuity. And tonight, the American auto industry is back.
What's happening in Detroit can happen in other industries. It can happen in Cleveland and Pittsburgh and Raleigh. We can't bring back every job that's left our shores. But right now, it's getting more expensive to do business in places like China. Meanwhile, America is more productive. A few weeks ago, the CEO of Master Lock told me that it now makes business sense for him to bring jobs back home. Today, for the first time in fifteen years, Master Lock's unionized plant in Milwaukee is running at full capacity.
So we have a huge opportunity, at this moment, to bring manufacturing back. But we have to seize it. Tonight, my message to business leaders is simple: Ask yourselves what you can do to bring jobs back to your country, and your country will do everything we can to help you succeed.
We should start with our tax code. Right now, companies get tax breaks for moving jobs and profits overseas. Meanwhile, companies that choose to stay in America get hit with one of the highest tax rates in the world. It makes no sense, and everyone knows it.
So let's change it. First, if you're a business that wants to outsource jobs, you shouldn't get a tax deduction for doing it. That money should be used to cover moving expenses for companies like Master Lock that decide to bring jobs home.
Second, no American company should be able to avoid paying its fair share of taxes by moving jobs and profits overseas. From now on, every multinational company should have to pay a basic minimum tax. And every penny should go towards lowering taxes for companies that choose to stay here and hire here.
Third, if you're an American manufacturer, you should get a bigger tax cut. If you're a high-tech manufacturer, we should double the tax deduction you get for making products here. And if you want to relocate in a community that was hit hard when a factory left town, you should get help financing a new plant, equipment, or training for new workers.
My message is simple. It's time to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs overseas, and start rewarding companies that create jobs right here in America. Send me these tax reforms, and I'll sign them right away.
We're also making it easier for American businesses to sell products all over the world. Two years ago, I set a goal of doubling U.S. exports over five years. With the bipartisan trade agreements I signed into law, we are on track to meet that goal -- ahead of schedule. Soon, there will be millions of new customers for American goods in Panama, Colombia, and South Korea. Soon, there will be new cars on the streets of Seoul imported from Detroit, and Toledo, and Chicago.
I will go anywhere in the world to open new markets for American products. And I will not stand by when our competitors don't play by the rules. We've brought trade cases against China at nearly twice the rate as the last administration -- and it's made a difference. Over a thousand Americans are working today because we stopped a surge in Chinese tires. But we need to do more. It's not right when another country lets our movies, music, and software be pirated. It's not fair when foreign manufacturers have a leg up on ours only because they're heavily subsidized.
Tonight, I'm announcing the creation of a Trade Enforcement Unit that will be charged with investigating unfair trade practices in countries like China. There will be more inspections to prevent counterfeit or unsafe goods from crossing our borders. And this Congress should make sure that no foreign company has an advantage over American manufacturing when it comes to accessing finance or new markets like Russia. Our workers are the most productive on Earth, and if the playing field is level, I promise you -- America will always win.
I also hear from many business leaders who want to hire in the United States but can't find workers with the right skills. Growing industries in science and technology have twice as many openings as we have workers who can do the job. Think about that -- openings at a time when millions of Americans are looking for work.
That's inexcusable. And we know how to fix it.
Jackie Bray is a single mom from North Carolina who was laid off from her job as a mechanic. Then Siemens opened a gas turbine factory in Charlotte, and formed a partnership with Central Piedmont Community College. The company helped the college design courses in laser and robotics training. It paid Jackie's tuition, then hired her to help operate their plant.
I want every American looking for work to have the same opportunity as Jackie did. Join me in a national commitment to train two million Americans with skills that will lead directly to a job. My Administration has already lined up more companies that want to help. Model partnerships between businesses like Siemens and community colleges in places like Charlotte, Orlando, and Louisville are up and running. Now you need to give more community colleges the resources they need to become community career centers -- places that teach people skills that local businesses are looking for right now, from data management to high-tech manufacturing.
And I want to cut through the maze of confusing training programs, so that from now on, people like Jackie have one program, one website, and one place to go for all the information and help they need. It's time to turn our unemployment system into a reemployment system that puts people to work.
These reforms will help people get jobs that are open today. But to prepare for the jobs of tomorrow, our commitment to skills and education has to start earlier.
For less than one percent of what our Nation spends on education each year, we've convinced nearly every State in the country to raise their standards for teaching and learning -- the first time that's happened in a generation.
But challenges remain. And we know how to solve them.
At a time when other countries are doubling down on education, tight budgets have forced States to lay off thousands of teachers. We know a good teacher can increase the lifetime income of a classroom by over $250,000. A great teacher can offer an escape from poverty to the child who dreams beyond his circumstance. Every person in this chamber can point to a teacher who changed the trajectory of their lives. Most teachers work tirelessly, with modest pay, sometimes digging into their own pocket for school supplies -- just to make a difference.
Teachers matter. So instead of bashing them, or defending the status quo, let's offer schools a deal. Give them the resources to keep good teachers on the job, and reward the best ones. In return, grant schools flexibility: To teach with creativity and passion; to stop teaching to the test; and to replace teachers who just aren't helping kids learn.
We also know that when students aren't allowed to walk away from their education, more of them walk the stage to get their diploma. So tonight, I call on every State to require that all students stay in high school until they graduate or turn eighteen.
When kids do graduate, the most daunting challenge can be the cost of college. At a time when Americans owe more in tuition debt than credit card debt, this Congress needs to stop the interest rates on student loans from doubling in July. Extend the tuition tax credit we started that saves middle-class families thousands of dollars. And give more young people the chance to earn their way through college by doubling the number of work-study jobs in the next five years.
Of course, it's not enough for us to increase student aid. We can't just keep subsidizing skyrocketing tuition; we'll run out of money. States also need to do their part, by making higher education a higher priority in their budgets. And colleges and universities have to do their part by working to keep costs down. Recently, I spoke with a group of college presidents who've done just that. Some schools re-design courses to help students finish more quickly. Some use better technology. The point is, it's possible. So let me put colleges and universities on notice: If you can't stop tuition from going up, the funding you get from taxpayers will go down. Higher education can't be a luxury -- it's an economic imperative that every family in America should be able to afford.
Let's also remember that hundreds of thousands of talented, hardworking students in this country face another challenge: The fact that they aren't yet American citizens. Many were brought here as small children, are American through and through, yet they live every day with the threat of deportation. Others came more recently, to study business and science and engineering, but as soon as they get their degree, we send them home to invent new products and create new jobs somewhere else.
That doesn't make sense.
I believe as strongly as ever that we should take on illegal immigration. That's why my Administration has put more boots on the border than ever before. That's why there are fewer illegal crossings than when I took office.
The opponents of action are out of excuses. We should be working on comprehensive immigration reform right now. But if election-year politics keeps Congress from acting on a comprehensive plan, let's at least agree to stop expelling responsible young people who want to staff our labs, start new businesses, and defend this country. Send me a law that gives them the chance to earn their citizenship. I will sign it right away.
You see, an economy built to last is one where we encourage the talent and ingenuity of every person in this country. That means women should earn equal pay for equal work. It means we should support everyone who's willing to work; and every risk-taker and entrepreneur who aspires to become the next Steve Jobs.
After all, innovation is what America has always been about. Most new jobs are created in start-ups and small businesses. So let's pass an agenda that helps them succeed. Tear down regulations that prevent aspiring entrepreneurs from getting the financing to grow. Expand tax relief to small businesses that are raising wages and creating good jobs. Both parties agree on these ideas. So put them in a bill, and get it on my desk this year.
Innovation also demands basic research. Today, the discoveries taking place in our federally-financed labs and universities could lead to new treatments that kill cancer cells but leave healthy ones untouched. New lightweight vests for cops and soldiers that can stop any bullet. Don't gut these investments in our budget. Don't let other countries win the race for the future. Support the same kind of research and innovation that led to the computer chip and the Internet; to new American jobs and new American industries.
Nowhere is the promise of innovation greater than in American-made energy. Over the last three years, we've opened millions of new acres for oil and gas exploration, and tonight, I'm directing my Administration to open more than 75 percent of our potential offshore oil and gas resources. Right now, American oil production is the highest that it's been in eight years. That's right -- eight years. Not only that -- last year, we relied less on foreign oil than in any of the past sixteen years.
But with only 2 percent of the world's oil reserves, oil isn't enough. This country needs an all-out, all-of-the-above strategy that develops every available source of American energy -- a strategy that's cleaner, cheaper, and full of new jobs.
We have a supply of natural gas that can last America nearly one hundred years, and my Administration will take every possible action to safely develop this energy. Experts believe this will support more than 600,000 jobs by the end of the decade. And I'm requiring all companies that drill for gas on public lands to disclose the chemicals they use. America will develop this resource without putting the health and safety of our citizens at risk.
The development of natural gas will create jobs and power trucks and factories that are cleaner and cheaper, proving that we don't have to choose between our environment and our economy. And by the way, it was public research dollars, over the course of thirty years, that helped develop the technologies to extract all this natural gas out of shale rock -- reminding us that Government support is critical in helping businesses get new energy ideas off the ground.
What's true for natural gas is true for clean energy. In three years, our partnership with the private sector has already positioned America to be the world's leading manufacturer of high-tech batteries. Because of federal investments, renewable energy use has nearly doubled. And thousands of Americans have jobs because of it.
When Bryan Ritterby was laid off from his job making furniture, he said he worried that at 55, no one would give him a second chance. But he found work at Energetx, a wind turbine manufacturer in Michigan. Before the recession, the factory only made luxury yachts. Today, it's hiring workers like Bryan, who said, "I'm proud to be working in the industry of the future."
Our experience with shale gas shows us that the payoffs on these public investments don't always come right away. Some technologies don't pan out; some companies fail. But I will not walk away from the promise of clean energy. I will not walk away from workers like Bryan. I will not cede the wind or solar or battery industry to China or Germany because we refuse to make the same commitment here. We have subsidized oil companies for a century. That's long enough. It's time to end the taxpayer giveaways to an industry that's rarely been more profitable, and double-down on a clean energy industry that's never been more promising. Pass clean energy tax credits and create these jobs.
We can also spur energy innovation with new incentives. The differences in this chamber may be too deep right now to pass a comprehensive plan to fight climate change. But there's no reason why Congress shouldn't at least set a clean energy standard that creates a market for innovation. So far, you haven't acted. Well tonight, I will. I'm directing my Administration to allow the development of clean energy on enough public land to power three million homes. And I'm proud to announce that the Department of Defense, the world's largest consumer of energy, will make one of the largest commitments to clean energy in history -- with the Navy purchasing enough capacity to power a quarter of a million homes a year.
Of course, the easiest way to save money is to waste less energy. So here's another proposal: Help manufacturers eliminate energy waste in their factories and give businesses incentives to upgrade their buildings. Their energy bills will be $100 billion lower over the next decade, and America will have less pollution, more manufacturing, and more jobs for construction workers who need them. Send me a bill that creates these jobs.
Building this new energy future should be just one part of a broader agenda to repair America's infrastructure. So much of America needs to be rebuilt. We've got crumbling roads and bridges. A power grid that wastes too much energy. An incomplete high-speed broadband network that prevents a small business owner in rural America from selling her products all over the world.
During the Great Depression, America built the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge. After World War II, we connected our States with a system of highways. Democratic and Republican administrations invested in great projects that benefited everybody, from the workers who built them to the businesses that still use them today.
In the next few weeks, I will sign an Executive Order clearing away the red tape that slows down too many construction projects. But you need to fund these projects. Take the money we're no longer spending at war, use half of it to pay down our debt, and use the rest to do some nation-building right here at home.
There's never been a better time to build, especially since the construction industry was one of the hardest-hit when the housing bubble burst. Of course, construction workers weren't the only ones hurt. So were millions of innocent Americans who've seen their home values decline. And while Government can't fix the problem on its own, responsible homeowners shouldn't have to sit and wait for the housing market to hit bottom to get some relief.
That's why I'm sending this Congress a plan that gives every responsible homeowner the chance to save about $3,000 a year on their mortgage, by refinancing at historically low interest rates. No more red tape. No more runaround from the banks. A small fee on the largest financial institutions will ensure that it won't add to the deficit, and will give banks that were rescued by taxpayers a chance to repay a deficit of trust.
Let's never forget: Millions of Americans who work hard and play by the rules every day deserve a Government and a financial system that do the same. It's time to apply the same rules from top to bottom: No bailouts, no handouts, and no copouts. An America built to last insists on responsibility from everybody.
We've all paid the price for lenders who sold mortgages to people who couldn't afford them, and buyers who knew they couldn't afford them. That's why we need smart regulations to prevent irresponsible behavior. Rules to prevent financial fraud, or toxic dumping, or faulty medical devices, don't destroy the free market. They make the free market work better.
There is no question that some regulations are outdated, unnecessary, or too costly. In fact, I've approved fewer regulations in the first three years of my presidency than my Republican predecessor did in his. I've ordered every federal agency to eliminate rules that don't make sense. We've already announced over 500 reforms, and just a fraction of them will save business and citizens more than $10 billion over the next five years. We got rid of one rule from 40 years ago that could have forced some dairy farmers to spend $10,000 a year proving that they could contain a spill -- because milk was somehow classified as an oil. With a rule like that, I guess it was worth crying over spilled milk.
I'm confident a farmer can contain a milk spill without a federal agency looking over his shoulder. But I will not back down from making sure an oil company can contain the kind of oil spill we saw in the Gulf two years ago. I will not back down from protecting our kids from mercury pollution, or making sure that our food is safe and our water is clean. I will not go back to the days when health insurance companies had unchecked power to cancel your policy, deny you coverage, or charge women differently from men.
And I will not go back to the days when Wall Street was allowed to play by its own set of rules. The new rules we passed restore what should be any financial system's core purpose: Getting funding to entrepreneurs with the best ideas, and getting loans to responsible families who want to buy a home, start a business, or send a kid to college.
So if you're a big bank or financial institution, you are no longer allowed to make risky bets with your customers' deposits. You're required to write out a "living will" that details exactly how you'll pay the bills if you fail -- because the rest of us aren't bailing you out ever again. And if you're a mortgage lender or a payday lender or a credit card company, the days of signing people up for products they can't afford with confusing forms and deceptive practices are over. Today, American consumers finally have a watchdog in Richard Cordray with one job: To look out for them.
We will also establish a Financial Crimes Unit of highly trained investigators to crack down on large-scale fraud and protect people's investments. Some financial firms violate major anti-fraud laws because there's no real penalty for being a repeat offender. That's bad for consumers, and it's bad for the vast majority of bankers and financial service professionals who do the right thing. So pass legislation that makes the penalties for fraud count.
And tonight, I am asking my Attorney General to create a special unit of federal prosecutors and leading state attorneys general to expand our investigations into the abusive lending and packaging of risky mortgages that led to the housing crisis. This new unit will hold accountable those who broke the law, speed assistance to homeowners, and help turn the page on an era of recklessness that hurt so many Americans.
A return to the American values of fair play and shared responsibility will help us protect our people and our economy. But it should also guide us as we look to pay down our debt and invest in our future.
Right now, our most immediate priority is stopping a tax hike on 160 million working Americans while the recovery is still fragile. People cannot afford losing $40 out of each paycheck this year. There are plenty of ways to get this done. So let's agree right here, right now: No side issues. No drama. Pass the payroll tax cut without delay.
When it comes to the deficit, we've already agreed to more than $2 trillion in cuts and savings. But we need to do more, and that means making choices. Right now, we're poised to spend nearly $1 trillion more on what was supposed to be a temporary tax break for the wealthiest 2 percent of Americans. Right now, because of loopholes and shelters in the tax code, a quarter of all millionaires pay lower tax rates than millions of middle-class households. Right now, Warren Buffett pays a lower tax rate than his secretary.
Do we want to keep these tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans? Or do we want to keep our investments in everything else -- like education and medical research; a strong military and care for our veterans? Because if we're serious about paying down our debt, we can't do both.
The American people know what the right choice is. So do I. As I told the Speaker this summer, I'm prepared to make more reforms that rein in the long term costs of Medicare and Medicaid, and strengthen Social Security, so long as those programs remain a guarantee of security for seniors.
But in return, we need to change our tax code so that people like me, and an awful lot of Members of Congress, pay our fair share of taxes. Tax reform should follow the Buffett rule: If you make more than $1 million a year, you should not pay less than 30 percent in taxes. And my Republican friend Tom Coburn is right: Washington should stop subsidizing millionaires. In fact, if you're earning a million dollars a year, you shouldn't get special tax subsidies or deductions. On the other hand, if you make under $250,000 a year, like 98 percent of American families, your taxes shouldn't go up. You're the ones struggling with rising costs and stagnant wages. You're the ones who need relief.
Now, you can call this class warfare all you want. But asking a billionaire to pay at least as much as his secretary in taxes? Most Americans would call that common sense.
We don't begrudge financial success in this country. We admire it. When Americans talk about folks like me paying my fair share of taxes, it's not because they envy the rich. It's because they understand that when I get tax breaks I don't need and the country can't afford, it either adds to the deficit, or somebody else has to make up the difference -- like a senior on a fixed income; or a student trying to get through school; or a family trying to make ends meet. That's not right. Americans know it's not right. They know that this generation's success is only possible because past generations felt a responsibility to each other, and to their country's future, and they know our way of life will only endure if we feel that same sense of shared responsibility. That's how we'll reduce our deficit. That's an America built to last.
I recognize that people watching tonight have differing views about taxes and debt; energy and health care. But no matter what party they belong to, I bet most Americans are thinking the same thing right now: Nothing will get done this year, or next year, or maybe even the year after that, because Washington is broken.
Can you blame them for feeling a little cynical?
The greatest blow to confidence in our economy last year didn't come from events beyond our control. It came from a debate in Washington over whether the United States would pay its bills or not. Who benefited from that fiasco?
I've talked tonight about the deficit of trust between Main Street and Wall Street. But the divide between this city and the rest of the country is at least as bad -- and it seems to get worse every year.
Some of this has to do with the corrosive influence of money in politics. So together, let's take some steps to fix that. Send me a bill that bans insider trading by Members of Congress, and I will sign it tomorrow. Let's limit any elected official from owning stocks in industries they impact. Let's make sure people who bundle campaign contributions for Congress can't lobby Congress, and vice versa -- an idea that has bipartisan support, at least outside of Washington.
Some of what's broken has to do with the way Congress does its business these days. A simple majority is no longer enough to get anything -- even routine business -- passed through the Senate. Neither party has been blameless in these tactics. Now both parties should put an end to it. For starters, I ask the Senate to pass a rule that all judicial and public service nominations receive a simple up or down vote within 90 days.
The executive branch also needs to change. Too often, it's inefficient, outdated and remote. That's why I've asked this Congress to grant me the authority to consolidate the federal bureaucracy so that our Government is leaner, quicker, and more responsive to the needs of the American people.
Finally, none of these reforms can happen unless we also lower the temperature in this town. We need to end the notion that the two parties must be locked in a perpetual campaign of mutual destruction; that politics is about clinging to rigid ideologies instead of building consensus around common sense ideas.
I'm a Democrat. But I believe what Republican Abraham Lincoln believed: That Government should do for people only what they cannot do better by themselves, and no more. That's why my education reform offers more competition, and more control for schools and States. That's why we're getting rid of regulations that don't work. That's why our health care law relies on a reformed private market, not a Government program.
On the other hand, even my Republican friends who complain the most about Government spending have supported federally-financed roads, and clean energy projects, and federal offices for the folks back home.
The point is, we should all want a smarter, more effective Government. And while we may not be able to bridge our biggest philosophical differences this year, we can make real progress. With or without this Congress, I will keep taking actions that help the economy grow. But I can do a whole lot more with your help. Because when we act together, there is nothing the United States of America can't achieve.
That is the lesson we've learned from our actions abroad over the last few years.
Ending the Iraq war has allowed us to strike decisive blows against our enemies. From Pakistan to Yemen, the al Qaeda operatives who remain are scrambling, knowing that they can't escape the reach of the United States of America.
From this position of strength, we've begun to wind down the war in Afghanistan. Ten thousand of our troops have come home. Twenty-three thousand more will leave by the end of this summer. This transition to Afghan lead will continue, and we will build an enduring partnership with Afghanistan, so that it is never again a source of attacks against America.
As the tide of war recedes, a wave of change has washed across the Middle East and North Africa, from Tunis to Cairo; from Sana'a to Tripoli. A year ago, Qadhafi was one of the world's longest-serving dictators -- a murderer with American blood on his hands. Today, he is gone. And in Syria, I have no doubt that the Assad regime will soon discover that the forces of change can't be reversed, and that human dignity can't be denied.
How this incredible transformation will end remains uncertain. But we have a huge stake in the outcome. And while it is ultimately up to the people of the region to decide their fate, we will advocate for those values that have served our own country so well. We will stand against violence and intimidation. We will stand for the rights and dignity of all human beings -- men and women; Christians, Muslims, and Jews. We will support policies that lead to strong and stable democracies and open markets, because tyranny is no match for liberty.
And we will safeguard America's own security against those who threaten our citizens, our friends, and our interests. Look at Iran. Through the power of our diplomacy, a world that was once divided about how to deal with Iran's nuclear program now stands as one. The regime is more isolated than ever before; its leaders are faced with crippling sanctions, and as long as they shirk their responsibilities, this pressure will not relent. Let there be no doubt: America is determined to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon, and I will take no options off the table to achieve that goal. But a peaceful resolution of this issue is still possible, and far better, and if Iran changes course and meets its obligations, it can rejoin the community of nations.
The renewal of American leadership can be felt across the globe. Our oldest alliances in Europe and Asia are stronger than ever. Our ties to the Americas are deeper. Our iron-clad commitment to Israel's security has meant the closest military cooperation between our two countries in history. We've made it clear that America is a Pacific power, and a new beginning in Burma has lit a new hope. From the coalitions we've built to secure nuclear materials, to the missions we've led against hunger and disease; from the blows we've dealt to our enemies; to the enduring power of our moral example, America is back.
Anyone who tells you otherwise, anyone who tells you that America is in decline or that our influence has waned, doesn't know what they're talking about. That's not the message we get from leaders around the world, all of whom are eager to work with us. That's not how people feel from Tokyo to Berlin; from Cape Town to Rio; where opinions of America are higher than they've been in years. Yes, the world is changing; no, we can't control every event. But America remains the one indispensable nation in world affairs -- and as long as I'm President, I intend to keep it that way.
That's why, working with our military leaders, I have proposed a new defense strategy that ensures we maintain the finest military in the world, while saving nearly half a trillion dollars in our budget. To stay one step ahead of our adversaries, I have already sent this Congress legislation that will secure our country from the growing danger of cyber-threats.
Above all, our freedom endures because of the men and women in uniform who defend it. As they come home, we must serve them as well as they served us. That includes giving them the care and benefits they have earned -- which is why we've increased annual VA spending every year I've been President. And it means enlisting our veterans in the work of rebuilding our Nation.
With the bipartisan support of this Congress, we are providing new tax credits to companies that hire vets. Michelle and Jill Biden have worked with American businesses to secure a pledge of 135,000 jobs for veterans and their families. And tonight, I'm proposing a Veterans Job Corps that will help our communities hire veterans as cops and firefighters, so that America is as strong as those who defend her.
Which brings me back to where I began. Those of us who've been sent here to serve can learn from the service of our troops. When you put on that uniform, it doesn't matter if you're black or white; Asian or Latino; conservative or liberal; rich or poor; gay or straight. When you're marching into battle, you look out for the person next to you, or the mission fails. When you're in the thick of the fight, you rise or fall as one unit, serving one Nation, leaving no one behind.
One of my proudest possessions is the flag that the SEAL Team took with them on the mission to get bin Laden. On it are each of their names. Some may be Democrats. Some may be Republicans. But that doesn't matter. Just like it didn't matter that day in the Situation Room, when I sat next to Bob Gates -- a man who was George Bush's defense secretary; and Hillary Clinton, a woman who ran against me for president.
All that mattered that day was the mission. No one thought about politics. No one thought about themselves. One of the young men involved in the raid later told me that he didn't deserve credit for the mission. It only succeeded, he said, because every single member of that unit did their job -- the pilot who landed the helicopter that spun out of control; the translator who kept others from entering the compound; the troops who separated the women and children from the fight; the SEALs who charged up the stairs. More than that, the mission only succeeded because every member of that unit trusted each other -- because you can't charge up those stairs, into darkness and danger, unless you know that there's someone behind you, watching your back.
So it is with America. Each time I look at that flag, I'm reminded that our destiny is stitched together like those fifty stars and those thirteen stripes. No one built this country on their own. This Nation is great because we built it together. This Nation is great because we worked as a team. This Nation is great because we get each other's backs. And if we hold fast to that truth, in this moment of trial, there is no challenge too great; no mission too hard. As long as we're joined in common purpose, as long as we maintain our common resolve, our journey moves forward, our future is hopeful, and the state of our Union will always be strong.
Thank you, God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.

***

State of the Union Address
Barack Obama
February 12, 2013

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, fellow citizens:
Fifty-one years ago, John F. Kennedy declared to this Chamber that "the Constitution makes us not rivals for power but partners for progress." "It is my task," he said, "to report the State of the Union -- to improve it is the task of us all."
Tonight, thanks to the grit and determination of the American people, there is much progress to report. After a decade of grinding war, our brave men and women in uniform are coming home. After years of grueling recession, our businesses have created over six million new jobs. We buy more American cars than we have in five years, and less foreign oil than we have in twenty. Our housing market is healing, our stock market is rebounding, and consumers, patients, and homeowners enjoy stronger protections than ever before.
Together, we have cleared away the rubble of crisis, and can say with renewed confidence that the state of our union is stronger.
But we gather here knowing that there are millions of Americans whose hard work and dedication have not yet been rewarded. Our economy is adding jobs -- but too many people still can't find full-time employment. Corporate profits have rocketed to all-time highs -- but for more than a decade, wages and incomes have barely budged.
It is our generation's task, then, to reignite the true engine of America's economic growth -- a rising, thriving middle class.
It is our unfinished task to restore the basic bargain that built this country -- the idea that if you work hard and meet your responsibilities, you can get ahead, no matter where you come from, what you look like, or who you love.
It is our unfinished task to make sure that this government works on behalf of the many, and not just the few; that it encourages free enterprise, rewards individual initiative, and opens the doors of opportunity to every child across this great nation.
The American people don't expect government to solve every problem. They don't expect those of us in this chamber to agree on every issue. But they do expect us to put the nation's interests before party. They do expect us to forge reasonable compromise where we can. For they know that America moves forward only when we do so together; and that the responsibility of improving this union remains the task of us all.
Our work must begin by making some basic decisions about our budget -- decisions that will have a huge impact on the strength of our recovery.
Over the last few years, both parties have worked together to reduce the deficit by more than $2.5 trillion -- mostly through spending cuts, but also by raising tax rates on the wealthiest 1 percent of Americans. As a result, we are more than halfway towards the goal of $4 trillion in deficit reduction that economists say we need to stabilize our finances.
Now we need to finish the job. And the question is, how?
In 2011, Congress passed a law saying that if both parties couldn't agree on a plan to reach our deficit goal, about a trillion dollars' worth of budget cuts would automatically go into effect this year. These sudden, harsh, arbitrary cuts would jeopardize our military readiness. They'd devastate priorities like education, energy, and medical research. They would certainly slow our recovery, and cost us hundreds of thousands of jobs. That's why Democrats, Republicans, business leaders, and economists have already said that these cuts, known here in Washington as "the sequester," are a really bad idea.
Now, some in this Congress have proposed preventing only the defense cuts by making even bigger cuts to things like education and job training; Medicare and Social Security benefits.
That idea is even worse. Yes, the biggest driver of our long-term debt is the rising cost of health care for an aging population. And those of us who care deeply about programs like Medicare must embrace the need for modest reforms -- otherwise, our retirement programs will crowd out the investments we need for our children, and jeopardize the promise of a secure retirement for future generations.
But we can't ask senior citizens and working families to shoulder the entire burden of deficit reduction while asking nothing more from the wealthiest and most powerful. We won't grow the middle class simply by shifting the cost of health care or college onto families that are already struggling, or by forcing communities to lay off more teachers, cops, and firefighters. Most Americans -- Democrats, Republicans, and Independents -- understand that we can't just cut our way to prosperity. They know that broad-based economic growth requires a balanced approach to deficit reduction, with spending cuts and revenue, and with everybody doing their fair share. And that's the approach I offer tonight.
On Medicare, I'm prepared to enact reforms that will achieve the same amount of health care savings by the beginning of the next decade as the reforms proposed by the bipartisan Simpson-Bowles commission. Already, the Affordable Care Act is helping to slow the growth of health care costs. The reforms I'm proposing go even further. We'll reduce taxpayer subsidies to prescription drug companies and ask more from the wealthiest seniors. We'll bring down costs by changing the way our government pays for Medicare, because our medical bills shouldn't be based on the number of tests ordered or days spent in the hospital -- they should be based on the quality of care that our seniors receive. And I am open to additional reforms from both parties, so long as they don't violate the guarantee of a secure retirement. Our government shouldn't make promises we cannot keep -- but we must keep the promises we've already made.
To hit the rest of our deficit reduction target, we should do what leaders in both parties have already suggested, and save hundreds of billions of dollars by getting rid of tax loopholes and deductions for the well-off and well-connected. After all, why would we choose to make deeper cuts to education and Medicare just to protect special interest tax breaks? How is that fair? How does that promote growth?
Now is our best chance for bipartisan, comprehensive tax reform that encourages job creation and helps bring down the deficit. The American people deserve a tax code that helps small businesses spend less time filling out complicated forms, and more time expanding and hiring; a tax code that ensures billionaires with high-powered accountants can't pay a lower rate than their hard-working secretaries; a tax code that lowers incentives to move jobs overseas, and lowers tax rates for businesses and manufacturers that create jobs right here in America. That's what tax reform can deliver. That's what we can do together.
I realize that tax reform and entitlement reform won't be easy. The politics will be hard for both sides. None of us will get 100 percent of what we want. But the alternative will cost us jobs, hurt our economy, and visit hardship on millions of hardworking Americans. So let's set party interests aside, and work to pass a budget that replaces reckless cuts with smart savings and wise investments in our future. And let's do it without the brinksmanship that stresses consumers and scares off investors. The greatest nation on Earth cannot keep conducting its business by drifting from one manufactured crisis to the next. Let's agree, right here, right now, to keep the people's government open, pay our bills on time, and always uphold the full faith and credit of the United States of America. The American people have worked too hard, for too long, rebuilding from one crisis to see their elected officials cause another.
Now, most of us agree that a plan to reduce the deficit must be part of our agenda. But let's be clear: deficit reduction alone is not an economic plan. A growing economy that creates good, middle-class jobs -- that must be the North Star that guides our efforts. Every day, we should ask ourselves three questions as a nation: How do we attract more jobs to our shores? How do we equip our people with the skills needed to do those jobs? And how do we make sure that hard work leads to a decent living?
A year and a half ago, I put forward an American Jobs Act that independent economists said would create more than one million new jobs. I thank the last Congress for passing some of that agenda, and I urge this Congress to pass the rest. Tonight, I'll lay out additional proposals that are fully paid for and fully consistent with the budget framework both parties agreed to just 18 months ago. Let me repeat -- nothing I'm proposing tonight should increase our deficit by a single dime. It's not a bigger government we need, but a smarter government that sets priorities and invests in broad-based growth.
Our first priority is making America a magnet for new jobs and manufacturing.
After shedding jobs for more than 10 years, our manufacturers have added about 500,000 jobs over the past three. Caterpillar is bringing jobs back from Japan. Ford is bringing jobs back from Mexico. After locating plants in other countries like China, Intel is opening its most advanced plant right here at home. And this year, Apple will start making Macs in America again.
There are things we can do, right now, to accelerate this trend. Last year, we created our first manufacturing innovation institute in Youngstown, Ohio. A once-shuttered warehouse is now a state-of-the art lab where new workers are mastering the 3D printing that has the potential to revolutionize the way we make almost everything. There's no reason this can't happen in other towns. So tonight, I'm announcing the launch of three more of these manufacturing hubs, where businesses will partner with the Departments of Defense and Energy to turn regions left behind by globalization into global centers of high-tech jobs. And I ask this Congress to help create a network of fifteen of these hubs and guarantee that the next revolution in manufacturing is Made in America.
If we want to make the best products, we also have to invest in the best ideas. Every dollar we invested to map the human genome returned $140 to our economy. Today, our scientists are mapping the human brain to unlock the answers to Alzheimer's; developing drugs to regenerate damaged organs; devising new material to make batteries ten times more powerful. Now is not the time to gut these job-creating investments in science and innovation. Now is the time to reach a level of research and development not seen since the height of the Space Race. And today, no area holds more promise than our investments in American energy.
After years of talking about it, we are finally poised to control our own energy future. We produce more oil at home than we have in 15 years. We have doubled the distance our cars will go on a gallon of gas, and the amount of renewable energy we generate from sources like wind and solar -- with tens of thousands of good, American jobs to show for it. We produce more natural gas than ever before -- and nearly everyone's energy bill is lower because of it. And over the last four years, our emissions of the dangerous carbon pollution that threatens our planet have actually fallen.
But for the sake of our children and our future, we must do more to combat climate change. Yes, it's true that no single event makes a trend. But the fact is, the 12 hottest years on record have all come in the last 15. Heat waves, droughts, wildfires, and floods -- all are now more frequent and intense. We can choose to believe that Superstorm Sandy, and the most severe drought in decades, and the worst wildfires some states have ever seen were all just a freak coincidence. Or we can choose to believe in the overwhelming judgment of science -- and act before it's too late.
The good news is, we can make meaningful progress on this issue while driving strong economic growth. I urge this Congress to pursue a bipartisan, market-based solution to climate change, like the one John McCain and Joe Lieberman worked on together a few years ago. But if Congress won't act soon to protect future generations, I will. I will direct my Cabinet to come up with executive actions we can take, now and in the future, to reduce pollution, prepare our communities for the consequences of climate change, and speed the transition to more sustainable sources of energy.
Four years ago, other countries dominated the clean energy market and the jobs that came with it. We've begun to change that. Last year, wind energy added nearly half of all new power capacity in America. So let's generate even more. Solar energy gets cheaper by the year -- so let's drive costs down even further. As long as countries like China keep going all-in on clean energy, so must we.
In the meantime, the natural gas boom has led to cleaner power and greater energy independence. That's why my Administration will keep cutting red tape and speeding up new oil and gas permits. But I also want to work with this Congress to encourage the research and technology that helps natural gas burn even cleaner and protects our air and water.
Indeed, much of our new-found energy is drawn from lands and waters that we, the public, own together. So tonight, I propose we use some of our oil and gas revenues to fund an Energy Security Trust that will drive new research and technology to shift our cars and trucks off oil for good. If a non-partisan coalition of CEOs and retired generals and admirals can get behind this idea, then so can we. Let's take their advice and free our families and businesses from the painful spikes in gas prices we've put up with for far too long. I'm also issuing a new goal for America: let's cut in half the energy wasted by our homes and businesses over the next twenty years. The states with the best ideas to create jobs and lower energy bills by constructing more efficient buildings will receive federal support to help make it happen.
America's energy sector is just one part of an aging infrastructure badly in need of repair. Ask any CEO where they'd rather locate and hire: a country with deteriorating roads and bridges, or one with high-speed rail and internet; high-tech schools and self-healing power grids. The CEO of Siemens America -- a company that brought hundreds of new jobs to North Carolina -- has said that if we upgrade our infrastructure, they'll bring even more jobs. And I know that you want these job-creating projects in your districts. I've seen you all at the ribbon-cuttings.
Tonight, I propose a "Fix-It-First" program to put people to work as soon as possible on our most urgent repairs, like the nearly 70,000 structurally deficient bridges across the country. And to make sure taxpayers don't shoulder the whole burden, I'm also proposing a Partnership to Rebuild America that attracts private capital to upgrade what our businesses need most: modern ports to move our goods; modern pipelines to withstand a storm; modern schools worthy of our children. Let's prove that there is no better place to do business than the United States of America. And let's start right away.
Part of our rebuilding effort must also involve our housing sector. Today, our housing market is finally healing from the collapse of 2007. Home prices are rising at the fastest pace in six years, home purchases are up nearly 50 percent, and construction is expanding again.
But even with mortgage rates near a 50-year low, too many families with solid credit who want to buy a home are being rejected. Too many families who have never missed a payment and want to refinance are being told no. That's holding our entire economy back, and we need to fix it. Right now, there's a bill in this Congress that would give every responsible homeowner in America the chance to save $3,000 a year by refinancing at today's rates. Democrats and Republicans have supported it before. What are we waiting for? Take a vote, and send me that bill. Right now, overlapping regulations keep responsible young families from buying their first home. What's holding us back? Let's streamline the process, and help our economy grow.
These initiatives in manufacturing, energy, infrastructure, and housing will help entrepreneurs and small business owners expand and create new jobs. But none of it will matter unless we also equip our citizens with the skills and training to fill those jobs. And that has to start at the earliest possible age.
Study after study shows that the sooner a child begins learning, the better he or she does down the road. But today, fewer than 3 in 10 four year-olds are enrolled in a high-quality preschool program. Most middle-class parents can't afford a few hundred bucks a week for private preschool. And for poor kids who need help the most, this lack of access to preschool education can shadow them for the rest of their lives.
Tonight, I propose working with states to make high-quality preschool available to every child in America. Every dollar we invest in high-quality early education can save more than seven dollars later on -- by boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, even reducing violent crime. In states that make it a priority to educate our youngest children, like Georgia or Oklahoma, studies show students grow up more likely to read and do math at grade level, graduate high school, hold a job, and form more stable families of their own. So let's do what works, and make sure none of our children start the race of life already behind. Let's give our kids that chance.
Let's also make sure that a high school diploma puts our kids on a path to a good job. Right now, countries like Germany focus on graduating their high school students with the equivalent of a technical degree from one of our community colleges, so that they're ready for a job. At schools like P-Tech in Brooklyn, a collaboration between New York Public Schools, the City University of New York, and IBM, students will graduate with a high school diploma and an associate degree in computers or engineering.
We need to give every American student opportunities like this. Four years ago, we started Race to the Top -- a competition that convinced almost every state to develop smarter curricula and higher standards, for about 1 percent of what we spend on education each year. Tonight, I'm announcing a new challenge to redesign America's high schools so they better equip graduates for the demands of a high-tech economy. We'll reward schools that develop new partnerships with colleges and employers, and create classes that focus on science, technology, engineering, and math -- the skills today's employers are looking for to fill jobs right now and in the future.
Now, even with better high schools, most young people will need some higher education. It's a simple fact: the more education you have, the more likely you are to have a job and work your way into the middle class. But today, skyrocketing costs price way too many young people out of a higher education, or saddle them with unsustainable debt.
Through tax credits, grants, and better loans, we have made college more affordable for millions of students and families over the last few years. But taxpayers cannot continue to subsidize the soaring cost of higher education. Colleges must do their part to keep costs down, and it's our job to make sure they do. Tonight, I ask Congress to change the Higher Education Act, so that affordability and value are included in determining which colleges receive certain types of federal aid. And tomorrow, my Administration will release a new "College Scorecard" that parents and students can use to compare schools based on a simple criteria: where you can get the most bang for your educational buck.
To grow our middle class, our citizens must have access to the education and training that today's jobs require. But we also have to make sure that America remains a place where everyone who's willing to work hard has the chance to get ahead.
Our economy is stronger when we harness the talents and ingenuity of striving, hopeful immigrants. And right now, leaders from the business, labor, law enforcement, and faith communities all agree that the time has come to pass comprehensive immigration reform.
Real reform means strong border security, and we can build on the progress my Administration has already made -- putting more boots on the southern border than at any time in our history, and reducing illegal crossings to their lowest levels in 40 years.
Real reform means establishing a responsible pathway to earned citizenship -- a path that includes passing a background check, paying taxes and a meaningful penalty, learning English, and going to the back of the line behind the folks trying to come here legally.
And real reform means fixing the legal immigration system to cut waiting periods, reduce bureaucracy, and attract the highly-skilled entrepreneurs and engineers that will help create jobs and grow our economy.
In other words, we know what needs to be done. As we speak, bipartisan groups in both chambers are working diligently to draft a bill, and I applaud their efforts. Now let's get this done. Send me a comprehensive immigration reform bill in the next few months, and I will sign it right away.
But we can't stop there. We know our economy is stronger when our wives, mothers, and daughters can live their lives free from discrimination in the workplace, and free from the fear of domestic violence. Today, the Senate passed the Violence Against Women Act that Joe Biden originally wrote almost 20 years ago. I urge the House to do the same. And I ask this Congress to declare that women should earn a living equal to their efforts, and finally pass the Paycheck Fairness Act this year.
We know our economy is stronger when we reward an honest day's work with honest wages. But today, a full-time worker making the minimum wage earns $14,500 a year. Even with the tax relief we've put in place, a family with two kids that earns the minimum wage still lives below the poverty line. That's wrong. That's why, since the last time this Congress raised the minimum wage, nineteen states have chosen to bump theirs even higher.
Tonight, let's declare that in the wealthiest nation on Earth, no one who works full-time should have to live in poverty, and raise the federal minimum wage to $9.00 an hour. This single step would raise the incomes of millions of working families. It could mean the difference between groceries or the food bank; rent or eviction; scraping by or finally getting ahead. For businesses across the country, it would mean customers with more money in their pockets. In fact, working folks shouldn't have to wait year after year for the minimum wage to go up while CEO pay has never been higher. So here's an idea that Governor Romney and I actually agreed on last year: let's tie the minimum wage to the cost of living, so that it finally becomes a wage you can live on.
Tonight, let's also recognize that there are communities in this country where no matter how hard you work, it's virtually impossible to get ahead. Factory towns decimated from years of plants packing up. Inescapable pockets of poverty, urban and rural, where young adults are still fighting for their first job. America is not a place where chance of birth or circumstance should decide our destiny. And that is why we need to build new ladders of opportunity into the middle class for all who are willing to climb them.
Let's offer incentives to companies that hire Americans who've got what it takes to fill that job opening, but have been out of work so long that no one will give them a chance. Let's put people back to work rebuilding vacant homes in run-down neighborhoods. And this year, my Administration will begin to partner with 20 of the hardest-hit towns in America to get these communities back on their feet. We'll work with local leaders to target resources at public safety, education, and housing. We'll give new tax credits to businesses that hire and invest. And we'll work to strengthen families by removing the financial deterrents to marriage for low-income couples, and doing more to encourage fatherhood -- because what makes you a man isn't the ability to conceive a child; it's having the courage to raise one.
Stronger families. Stronger communities. A stronger America. It is this kind of prosperity -- broad, shared, and built on a thriving middle class -- that has always been the source of our progress at home. It is also the foundation of our power and influence throughout the world.
Tonight, we stand united in saluting the troops and civilians who sacrifice every day to protect us. Because of them, we can say with confidence that America will complete its mission in Afghanistan, and achieve our objective of defeating the core of al Qaeda. Already, we have brought home 33,000 of our brave servicemen and women. This spring, our forces will move into a support role, while Afghan security forces take the lead. Tonight, I can announce that over the next year, another 34,000 American troops will come home from Afghanistan. This drawdown will continue. And by the end of next year, our war in Afghanistan will be over.
Beyond 2014, America's commitment to a unified and sovereign Afghanistan will endure, but the nature of our commitment will change. We are negotiating an agreement with the Afghan government that focuses on two missions: training and equipping Afghan forces so that the country does not again slip into chaos, and counter-terrorism efforts that allow us to pursue the remnants of al Qaeda and their affiliates.
Today, the organization that attacked us on 9/11 is a shadow of its former self. Different al Qaeda affiliates and extremist groups have emerged -- from the Arabian Peninsula to Africa. The threat these groups pose is evolving. But to meet this threat, we don't need to send tens of thousands of our sons and daughters abroad, or occupy other nations. Instead, we will need to help countries like Yemen, Libya, and Somalia provide for their own security, and help allies who take the fight to terrorists, as we have in Mali. And, where necessary, through a range of capabilities, we will continue to take direct action against those terrorists who pose the gravest threat to Americans.
As we do, we must enlist our values in the fight. That is why my Administration has worked tirelessly to forge a durable legal and policy framework to guide our counterterrorism operations. Throughout, we have kept Congress fully informed of our efforts. I recognize that in our democracy, no one should just take my word that we're doing things the right way. So, in the months ahead, I will continue to engage with Congress to ensure not only that our targeting, detention, and prosecution of terrorists remains consistent with our laws and system of checks and balances, but that our efforts are even more transparent to the American people and to the world.
Of course, our challenges don't end with al Qaeda. America will continue to lead the effort to prevent the spread of the world's most dangerous weapons. The regime in North Korea must know that they will only achieve security and prosperity by meeting their international obligations. Provocations of the sort we saw last night will only isolate them further, as we stand by our allies, strengthen our own missile defense, and lead the world in taking firm action in response to these threats.
Likewise, the leaders of Iran must recognize that now is the time for a diplomatic solution, because a coalition stands united in demanding that they meet their obligations, and we will do what is necessary to prevent them from getting a nuclear weapon. At the same time, we will engage Russia to seek further reductions in our nuclear arsenals, and continue leading the global effort to secure nuclear materials that could fall into the wrong hands -- because our ability to influence others depends on our willingness to lead.
America must also face the rapidly growing threat from cyber-attacks. We know hackers steal people's identities and infiltrate private e-mail. We know foreign countries and companies swipe our corporate secrets. Now our enemies are also seeking the ability to sabotage our power grid, our financial institutions, and our air traffic control systems. We cannot look back years from now and wonder why we did nothing in the face of real threats to our security and our economy.
That's why, earlier today, I signed a new executive order that will strengthen our cyber defenses by increasing information sharing, and developing standards to protect our national security, our jobs, and our privacy. Now, Congress must act as well, by passing legislation to give our government a greater capacity to secure our networks and deter attacks.
Even as we protect our people, we should remember that today's world presents not only dangers, but opportunities. To boost American exports, support American jobs, and level the playing field in the growing markets of Asia, we intend to complete negotiations on a Trans-Pacific Partnership. And tonight, I am announcing that we will launch talks on a comprehensive Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the European Union -- because trade that is free and fair across the Atlantic supports millions of good-paying American jobs.
We also know that progress in the most impoverished parts of our world enriches us all. In many places, people live on little more than a dollar a day. So the United States will join with our allies to eradicate such extreme poverty in the next two decades: by connecting more people to the global economy and empowering women; by giving our young and brightest minds new opportunities to serve and helping communities to feed, power, and educate themselves; by saving the world's children from preventable deaths; and by realizing the promise of an AIDS-free generation.
Above all, America must remain a beacon to all who seek freedom during this period of historic change. I saw the power of hope last year in Rangoon -- when Aung San Suu Kyi welcomed an American President into the home where she had been imprisoned for years; when thousands of Burmese lined the streets, waving American flags, including a man who said, "There is justice and law in the United States. I want our country to be like that."
In defense of freedom, we will remain the anchor of strong alliances from the Americas to Africa; from Europe to Asia. In the Middle East, we will stand with citizens as they demand their universal rights, and support stable transitions to democracy. The process will be messy, and we cannot presume to dictate the course of change in countries like Egypt; but we can -- and will -- insist on respect for the fundamental rights of all people. We will keep the pressure on a Syrian regime that has murdered its own people, and support opposition leaders that respect the rights of every Syrian. And we will stand steadfast with Israel in pursuit of security and a lasting peace. These are the messages I will deliver when I travel to the Middle East next month.
All this work depends on the courage and sacrifice of those who serve in dangerous places at great personal risk -- our diplomats, our intelligence officers, and the men and women of the United States Armed Forces. As long as I'm Commander-in-Chief, we will do whatever we must to protect those who serve their country abroad, and we will maintain the best military in the world. We will invest in new capabilities, even as we reduce waste and wartime spending. We will ensure equal treatment for all service members, and equal benefits for their families -- gay and straight. We will draw upon the courage and skills of our sisters and daughters, because women have proven under fire that they are ready for combat. We will keep faith with our veterans -- investing in world-class care, including mental health care, for our wounded warriors; supporting our military families; and giving our veterans the benefits, education, and job opportunities they have earned. And I want to thank my wife Michelle and Dr. Jill Biden for their continued dedication to serving our military families as well as they serve us.
But defending our freedom is not the job of our military alone. We must all do our part to make sure our God-given rights are protected here at home. That includes our most fundamental right as citizens: the right to vote. When any Americans -- no matter where they live or what their party -- are denied that right simply because they can't wait for five, six, seven hours just to cast their ballot, we are betraying our ideals. That's why, tonight, I'm announcing a non-partisan commission to improve the voting experience in America. And I'm asking two long-time experts in the field, who've recently served as the top attorneys for my campaign and for Governor Romney's campaign, to lead it. We can fix this, and we will. The American people demand it. And so does our democracy.
Of course, what I've said tonight matters little if we don't come together to protect our most precious resource -- our children.
It has been two months since Newtown. I know this is not the first time this country has debated how to reduce gun violence. But this time is different. Overwhelming majorities of Americans -- Americans who believe in the 2nd Amendment -- have come together around commonsense reform -- like background checks that will make it harder for criminals to get their hands on a gun. Senators of both parties are working together on tough new laws to prevent anyone from buying guns for resale to criminals. Police chiefs are asking our help to get weapons of war and massive ammunition magazines off our streets, because they are tired of being outgunned.
Each of these proposals deserves a vote in Congress. If you want to vote no, that's your choice. But these proposals deserve a vote. Because in the two months since Newtown, more than a thousand birthdays, graduations, and anniversaries have been stolen from our lives by a bullet from a gun.
One of those we lost was a young girl named Hadiya Pendleton. She was 15 years old. She loved Fig Newtons and lip gloss. She was a majorette. She was so good to her friends, they all thought they were her best friend. Just three weeks ago, she was here, in Washington, with her classmates, performing for her country at my inauguration. And a week later, she was shot and killed in a Chicago park after school, just a mile away from my house.
Hadiya's parents, Nate and Cleo, are in this chamber tonight, along with more than two dozen Americans whose lives have been torn apart by gun violence. They deserve a vote.
Gabby Giffords deserves a vote.
The families of Newtown deserve a vote.
The families of Aurora deserve a vote.
The families of Oak Creek, and Tucson, and Blacksburg, and the countless other communities ripped open by gun violence -- they deserve a simple vote.
Our actions will not prevent every senseless act of violence in this country. Indeed, no laws, no initiatives, no administrative acts will perfectly solve all the challenges I've outlined tonight. But we were never sent here to be perfect. We were sent here to make what difference we can, to secure this nation, expand opportunity, and uphold our ideals through the hard, often frustrating, but absolutely necessary work of self-government.
We were sent here to look out for our fellow Americans the same way they look out for one another, every single day, usually without fanfare, all across this country. We should follow their example.
We should follow the example of a New York City nurse named Menchu Sanchez. When Hurricane Sandy plunged her hospital into darkness, her thoughts were not with how her own home was faring -- they were with the twenty precious newborns in her care and the rescue plan she devised that kept them all safe.
We should follow the example of a North Miami woman named Desiline Victor. When she arrived at her polling place, she was told the wait to vote might be six hours. And as time ticked by, her concern was not with her tired body or aching feet, but whether folks like her would get to have their say. Hour after hour, a throng of people stayed in line in support of her. Because Desiline is 102 years old. And they erupted in cheers when she finally put on a sticker that read "I Voted."
We should follow the example of a police officer named Brian Murphy. When a gunman opened fire on a Sikh temple in Wisconsin, and Brian was the first to arrive, he did not consider his own safety. He fought back until help arrived, and ordered his fellow officers to protect the safety of the Americans worshiping inside -- even as he lay bleeding from twelve bullet wounds.
When asked how he did that, Brian said, "That's just the way we're made."
That's just the way we're made.
We may do different jobs, and wear different uniforms, and hold different views than the person beside us. But as Americans, we all share the same proud title:
We are citizens. It's a word that doesn't just describe our nationality or legal status. It describes the way we're made. It describes what we believe. It captures the enduring idea that this country only works when we accept certain obligations to one another and to future generations; that our rights are wrapped up in the rights of others; and that well into our third century as a nation, it remains the task of us all, as citizens of these United States, to be the authors of the next great chapter in our American story.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.
***

State of the Union Address
Barack Obama
January 28, 2014
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, my fellow Americans:
Today in America, a teacher spent extra time with a student who needed it, and did her part to lift America's graduation rate to its highest level in more than three decades.
An entrepreneur flipped on the lights in her tech startup, and did her part to add to the more than eight million new jobs our businesses have created over the past four years.
An autoworker fine-tuned some of the best, most fuel-efficient cars in the world, and did his part to help America wean itself off foreign oil.
A farmer prepared for the spring after the strongest five-year stretch of farm exports in our history. A rural doctor gave a young child the first prescription to treat asthma that his mother could afford. A man took the bus home from the graveyard shift, bone-tired but dreaming big dreams for his son. And in tight-knit communities across America, fathers and mothers will tuck in their kids, put an arm around their spouse, remember fallen comrades, and give thanks for being home from a war that, after twelve long years, is finally coming to an end.
Tonight, this chamber speaks with one voice to the people we represent: it is you, our citizens, who make the state of our union strong.
Here are the results of your efforts: The lowest unemployment rate in over five years. A rebounding housing market. A manufacturing sector that's adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s. More oil produced at home than we buy from the rest of the world the first time that's happened in nearly twenty years. Our deficits cut by more than half. And for the first time in over a decade, business leaders around the world have declared that China is no longer the world's number one place to invest; America is.
That's why I believe this can be a breakthrough year for America. After five years of grit and determined effort, the United States is better-positioned for the 21st century than any other nation on Earth.
The question for everyone in this chamber, running through every decision we make this year, is whether we are going to help or hinder this progress. For several years now, this town has been consumed by a rancorous argument over the proper size of the federal government. It's an important debate one that dates back to our very founding. But when that debate prevents us from carrying out even the most basic functions of our democracy when our differences shut down government or threaten the full faith and credit of the United States then we are not doing right by the American people.
As President, I'm committed to making Washington work better, and rebuilding the trust of the people who sent us here. I believe most of you are, too. Last month, thanks to the work of Democrats and Republicans, this Congress finally produced a budget that undoes some of last year's severe cuts to priorities like education. Nobody got everything they wanted, and we can still do more to invest in this country's future while bringing down our deficit in a balanced way. But the budget compromise should leave us freer to focus on creating new jobs, not creating new crises.
In the coming months, let's see where else we can make progress together. Let's make this a year of action. That's what most Americans want for all of us in this chamber to focus on their lives, their hopes, their aspirations. And what I believe unites the people of this nation, regardless of race or region or party, young or old, rich or poor, is the simple, profound belief in opportunity for all the notion that if you work hard and take responsibility, you can get ahead.
Let's face it: that belief has suffered some serious blows. Over more than three decades, even before the Great Recession hit, massive shifts in technology and global competition had eliminated a lot of good, middle-class jobs, and weakened the economic foundations that families depend on.
Today, after four years of economic growth, corporate profits and stock prices have rarely been higher, and those at the top have never done better. But average wages have barely budged. Inequality has deepened. Upward mobility has stalled. The cold, hard fact is that even in the midst of recovery, too many Americans are working more than ever just to get by let alone get ahead. And too many still aren't working at all.
Our job is to reverse these trends. It won't happen right away, and we won't agree on everything. But what I offer tonight is a set of concrete, practical proposals to speed up growth, strengthen the middle class, and build new ladders of opportunity into the middle class. Some require Congressional action, and I'm eager to work with all of you. But America does not stand still and neither will I. So wherever and whenever I can take steps without legislation to expand opportunity for more American families, that's what I'm going to do.
As usual, our First Lady sets a good example. Michelle's Let's Move partnership with schools, businesses, and local leaders has helped bring down childhood obesity rates for the first time in thirty years an achievement that will improve lives and reduce health care costs for decades to come. The Joining Forces alliance that Michelle and Jill Biden launched has already encouraged employers to hire or train nearly 400,000 veterans and military spouses. Taking a page from that playbook, the White House just organized a College Opportunity Summit where already, 150 universities, businesses, and nonprofits have made concrete commitments to reduce inequality in access to higher education and help every hardworking kid go to college and succeed when they get to campus. Across the country, we're partnering with mayors, governors, and state legislatures on issues from homelessness to marriage equality.
The point is, there are millions of Americans outside Washington who are tired of stale political arguments, and are moving this country forward. They believe, and I believe, that here in America, our success should depend not on accident of birth, but the strength of our work ethic and the scope of our dreams. That's what drew our forebears here. It's how the daughter of a factory worker is CEO of America's largest automaker; how the son of a barkeeper is Speaker of the House; how the son of a single mom can be President of the greatest nation on Earth.
Opportunity is who we are. And the defining project of our generation is to restore that promise.
We know where to start: the best measure of opportunity is access to a good job. With the economy picking up speed, companies say they intend to hire more people this year. And over half of big manufacturers say they're thinking of insourcing jobs from abroad.
So let's make that decision easier for more companies. Both Democrats and Republicans have argued that our tax code is riddled with wasteful, complicated loopholes that punish businesses investing here, and reward companies that keep profits abroad. Let's flip that equation. Let's work together to close those loopholes, end those incentives to ship jobs overseas, and lower tax rates for businesses that create jobs here at home.
Moreover, we can take the money we save with this transition to tax reform to create jobs rebuilding our roads, upgrading our ports, unclogging our commutes because in today's global economy, first-class jobs gravitate to first-class infrastructure. We'll need Congress to protect more than three million jobs by finishing transportation and waterways bills this summer. But I will act on my own to slash bureaucracy and streamline the permitting process for key projects, so we can get more construction workers on the job as fast as possible.
We also have the chance, right now, to beat other countries in the race for the next wave of high-tech manufacturing jobs. My administration has launched two hubs for high-tech manufacturing in Raleigh and Youngstown, where we've connected businesses to research universities that can help America lead the world in advanced technologies. Tonight, I'm announcing we'll launch six more this year. Bipartisan bills in both houses could double the number of these hubs and the jobs they create. So get those bills to my desk and put more Americans back to work.
Let's do more to help the entrepreneurs and small business owners who create most new jobs in America. Over the past five years, my administration has made more loans to small business owners than any other. And when ninety-eight percent of our exporters are small businesses, new trade partnerships with Europe and the Asia-Pacific will help them create more jobs. We need to work together on tools like bipartisan trade promotion authority to protect our workers, protect our environment, and open new markets to new goods stamped "Made in the USA." China and Europe aren't standing on the sidelines. Neither should we.
We know that the nation that goes all-in on innovation today will own the global economy tomorrow. This is an edge America cannot surrender. Federally-funded research helped lead to the ideas and inventions behind Google and smartphones. That's why Congress should undo the damage done by last year's cuts to basic research so we can unleash the next great American discovery whether it's vaccines that stay ahead of drug-resistant bacteria, or paper-thin material that's stronger than steel. And let's pass a patent reform bill that allows our businesses to stay focused on innovation, not costly, needless litigation.
Now, one of the biggest factors in bringing more jobs back is our commitment to American energy. The all-of-the-above energy strategy I announced a few years ago is working, and today, America is closer to energy independence than we've been in decades.
One of the reasons why is natural gas if extracted safely, it's the bridge fuel that can power our economy with less of the carbon pollution that causes climate change. Businesses plan to invest almost $100 billion in new factories that use natural gas. I'll cut red tape to help states get those factories built, and this Congress can help by putting people to work building fueling stations that shift more cars and trucks from foreign oil to American natural gas. My administration will keep working with the industry to sustain production and job growth while strengthening protection of our air, our water, and our communities. And while we're at it, I'll use my authority to protect more of our pristine federal lands for future generations.
It's not just oil and natural gas production that's booming; we're becoming a global leader in solar, too. Every four minutes, another American home or business goes solar; every panel pounded into place by a worker whose job can't be outsourced. Let's continue that progress with a smarter tax policy that stops giving $4 billion a year to fossil fuel industries that don't need it, so that we can invest more in fuels of the future that do.
And even as we've increased energy production, we've partnered with businesses, builders, and local communities to reduce the energy we consume. When we rescued our automakers, for example, we worked with them to set higher fuel efficiency standards for our cars. In the coming months, I'll build on that success by setting new standards for our trucks, so we can keep driving down oil imports and what we pay at the pump.
Taken together, our energy policy is creating jobs and leading to a cleaner, safer planet. Over the past eight years, the United States has reduced our total carbon pollution more than any other nation on Earth. But we have to act with more urgency because a changing climate is already harming western communities struggling with drought, and coastal cities dealing with floods. That's why I directed my administration to work with states, utilities, and others to set new standards on the amount of carbon pollution our power plants are allowed to dump into the air. The shift to a cleaner energy economy won't happen overnight, and it will require tough choices along the way. But the debate is settled. Climate change is a fact. And when our children's children look us in the eye and ask if we did all we could to leave them a safer, more stable world, with new sources of energy, I want us to be able to say yes, we did.
Finally, if we are serious about economic growth, it is time to heed the call of business leaders, labor leaders, faith leaders, and law enforcement and fix our broken immigration system. Republicans and Democrats in the Senate have acted. I know that members of both parties in the House want to do the same. Independent economists say immigration reform will grow our economy and shrink our deficits by almost $1 trillion in the next two decades. And for good reason: when people come here to fulfill their dreams to study, invent, and contribute to our culture they make our country a more attractive place for businesses to locate and create jobs for everyone. So let's get immigration reform done this year.
The ideas I've outlined so far can speed up growth and create more jobs. But in this rapidly-changing economy, we have to make sure that every American has the skills to fill those jobs.
The good news is, we know how to do it. Two years ago, as the auto industry came roaring back, Andra Rush opened up a manufacturing firm in Detroit. She knew that Ford needed parts for the best-selling truck in America, and she knew how to make them. She just needed the workforce. So she dialed up what we call an American Job Center places where folks can walk in to get the help or training they need to find a new job, or better job. She was flooded with new workers. And today, Detroit Manufacturing Systems has more than 700 employees.
What Andra and her employees experienced is how it should be for every employer and every job seeker. So tonight, I've asked Vice President Biden to lead an across-the-board reform of America's training programs to make sure they have one mission: train Americans with the skills employers need, and match them to good jobs that need to be filled right now. That means more on-the-job training, and more apprenticeships that set a young worker on an upward trajectory for life. It means connecting companies to community colleges that can help design training to fill their specific needs. And if Congress wants to help, you can concentrate funding on proven programs that connect more ready-to-work Americans with ready-to-be-filled jobs.
I'm also convinced we can help Americans return to the workforce faster by reforming unemployment insurance so that it's more effective in today's economy. But first, this Congress needs to restore the unemployment insurance you just let expire for 1.6 million people.
Let me tell you why.
Misty DeMars is a mother of two young boys. She'd been steadily employed since she was a teenager. She put herself through college. She'd never collected unemployment benefits. In May, she and her husband used their life savings to buy their first home. A week later, budget cuts claimed the job she loved. Last month, when their unemployment insurance was cut off, she sat down and wrote me a letter the kind I get every day. "We are the face of the unemployment crisis," she wrote. "I am not dependent on the governmentOur country depends on people like us who build careers, contribute to societycare about our neighborsI am confident that in time I will find a jobI will pay my taxes, and we will raise our children in their own home in the community we love. Please give us this chance."
Congress, give these hardworking, responsible Americans that chance. They need our help, but more important, this country needs them in the game. That's why I've been asking CEOs to give more long-term unemployed workers a fair shot at that new job and new chance to support their families; this week, many will come to the White House to make that commitment real. Tonight, I ask every business leader in America to join us and to do the same because we are stronger when America fields a full team.
Of course, it's not enough to train today's workforce. We also have to prepare tomorrow's workforce, by guaranteeing every child access to a world-class education.
Estiven Rodriguez couldn't speak a word of English when he moved to New York City at age nine. But last month, thanks to the support of great teachers and an innovative tutoring program, he led a march of his classmates through a crowd of cheering parents and neighbors from their high school to the post office, where they mailed off their college applications. And this son of a factory worker just found out he's going to college this fall.
Five years ago, we set out to change the odds for all our kids. We worked with lenders to reform student loans, and today, more young people are earning college degrees than ever before. Race to the Top, with the help of governors from both parties, has helped states raise expectations and performance. Teachers and principals in schools from Tennessee to Washington, D.C. are making big strides in preparing students with skills for the new economy problem solving, critical thinking, science, technology, engineering, and math. Some of this change is hard. It requires everything from more challenging curriculums and more demanding parents to better support for teachers and new ways to measure how well our kids think, not how well they can fill in a bubble on a test. But it's worth it and it's working.
The problem is we're still not reaching enough kids, and we're not reaching them in time. That has to change.
Research shows that one of the best investments we can make in a child's life is high-quality early education. Last year, I asked this Congress to help states make high-quality pre-K available to every four year-old. As a parent as well as a President, I repeat that request tonight. But in the meantime, thirty states have raised pre-k funding on their own. They know we can't wait. So just as we worked with states to reform our schools, this year, we'll invest in new partnerships with states and communities across the country in a race to the top for our youngest children. And as Congress decides what it's going to do, I'm going to pull together a coalition of elected officials, business leaders, and philanthropists willing to help more kids access the high-quality pre-K they need.
Last year, I also pledged to connect 99 percent of our students to high-speed broadband over the next four years. Tonight, I can announce that with the support of the FCC and companies like Apple, Microsoft, Sprint, and Verizon, we've got a down payment to start connecting more than 15,000 schools and twenty million students over the next two years, without adding a dime to the deficit.
We're working to redesign high schools and partner them with colleges and employers that offer the real-world education and hands-on training that can lead directly to a job and career. We're shaking up our system of higher education to give parents more information, and colleges more incentives to offer better value, so that no middle-class kid is priced out of a college education. We're offering millions the opportunity to cap their monthly student loan payments to ten percent of their income, and I want to work with Congress to see how we can help even more Americans who feel trapped by student loan debt. And I'm reaching out to some of America's leading foundations and corporations on a new initiative to help more young men of color facing tough odds stay on track and reach their full potential.
The bottom line is, Michelle and I want every child to have the same chance this country gave us. But we know our opportunity agenda won't be complete and too many young people entering the workforce today will see the American Dream as an empty promise unless we do more to make sure our economy honors the dignity of work, and hard work pays off for every single American.
Today, women make up about half our workforce. But they still make 77 cents for every dollar a man earns. That is wrong, and in 2014, it's an embarrassment. A woman deserves equal pay for equal work. She deserves to have a baby without sacrificing her job. A mother deserves a day off to care for a sick child or sick parent without running into hardship and you know what, a father does, too. It's time to do away with workplace policies that belong in a "Mad Men" episode. This year, let's all come together Congress, the White House, and businesses from Wall Street to Main Street to give every woman the opportunity she deserves. Because I firmly believe when women succeed, America succeeds.
Now, women hold a majority of lower-wage jobs but they're not the only ones stifled by stagnant wages. Americans understand that some people will earn more than others, and we don't resent those who, by virtue of their efforts, achieve incredible success. But Americans overwhelmingly agree that no one who works full time should ever have to raise a family in poverty.
In the year since I asked this Congress to raise the minimum wage, five states have passed laws to raise theirs. Many businesses have done it on their own. Nick Chute is here tonight with his boss, John Soranno. John's an owner of Punch Pizza in Minneapolis, and Nick helps make the dough. Only now he makes more of it: John just gave his employees a raise, to ten bucks an hour a decision that eased their financial stress and boosted their morale.
Tonight, I ask more of America's business leaders to follow John's lead and do what you can to raise your employees' wages. To every mayor, governor, and state legislator in America, I say, you don't have to wait for Congress to act; Americans will support you if you take this on. And as a chief executive, I intend to lead by example. Profitable corporations like Costco see higher wages as the smart way to boost productivity and reduce turnover. We should too. In the coming weeks, I will issue an Executive Order requiring federal contractors to pay their federally-funded employees a fair wage of at least $10.10 an hour because if you cook our troops' meals or wash their dishes, you shouldn't have to live in poverty.
Of course, to reach millions more, Congress needs to get on board. Today, the federal minimum wage is worth about twenty percent less than it was when Ronald Reagan first stood here. Tom Harkin and George Miller have a bill to fix that by lifting the minimum wage to $10.10. This will help families. It will give businesses customers with more money to spend. It doesn't involve any new bureaucratic program. So join the rest of the country. Say yes. Give America a raise.
There are other steps we can take to help families make ends meet, and few are more effective at reducing inequality and helping families pull themselves up through hard work than the Earned Income Tax Credit. Right now, it helps about half of all parents at some point. But I agree with Republicans like Senator Rubio that it doesn't do enough for single workers who don't have kids. So let's work together to strengthen the credit, reward work, and help more Americans get ahead.
Let's do more to help Americans save for retirement. Today, most workers don't have a pension. A Social Security check often isn't enough on its own. And while the stock market has doubled over the last five years, that doesn't help folks who don't have 401ks. That's why, tomorrow, I will direct the Treasury to create a new way for working Americans to start their own retirement savings: MyRA. It's a new savings bond that encourages folks to build a nest egg. MyRA guarantees a decent return with no risk of losing what you put in. And if this Congress wants to help, work with me to fix an upside-down tax code that gives big tax breaks to help the wealthy save, but does little to nothing for middle-class Americans. Offer every American access to an automatic IRA on the job, so they can save at work just like everyone in this chamber can. And since the most important investment many families make is their home, send me legislation that protects taxpayers from footing the bill for a housing crisis ever again, and keeps the dream of homeownership alive for future generations of Americans.
One last point on financial security. For decades, few things exposed hard-working families to economic hardship more than a broken health care system. And in case you haven't heard, we're in the process of fixing that.
A pre-existing condition used to mean that someone like Amanda Shelley, a physician assistant and single mom from Arizona, couldn't get health insurance. But on January 1st, she got covered. On January 3rd, she felt a sharp pain. On January 6th, she had emergency surgery. Just one week earlier, Amanda said, that surgery would've meant bankruptcy.
That's what health insurance reform is all about the peace of mind that if misfortune strikes, you don't have to lose everything.
Already, because of the Affordable Care Act, more than three million Americans under age 26 have gained coverage under their parents' plans.
More than nine million Americans have signed up for private health insurance or Medicaid coverage.
And here's another number: zero. Because of this law, no American can ever again be dropped or denied coverage for a preexisting condition like asthma, back pain, or cancer. No woman can ever be charged more just because she's a woman. And we did all this while adding years to Medicare's finances, keeping Medicare premiums flat, and lowering prescription costs for millions of seniors.
Now, I don't expect to convince my Republican friends on the merits of this law. But I know that the American people aren't interested in refighting old battles. So again, if you have specific plans to cut costs, cover more people, and increase choice tell America what you'd do differently. Let's see if the numbers add up. But let's not have another forty-something votes to repeal a law that's already helping millions of Americans like Amanda. The first forty were plenty. We got it. We all owe it to the American people to say what we're for, not just what we're against.
And if you want to know the real impact this law is having, just talk to Governor Steve Beshear of Kentucky, who's here tonight. Kentucky's not the most liberal part of the country, but he's like a man possessed when it comes to covering his commonwealth's families. "They are our friends and neighbors," he said. "They are people we shop and go to church withfarmers out on the tractorsgrocery clerksthey are people who go to work every morning praying they don't get sick. No one deserves to live that way."
Steve's right. That's why, tonight, I ask every American who knows someone without health insurance to help them get covered by March 31st. Moms, get on your kids to sign up. Kids, call your mom and walk her through the application. It will give her some peace of mind plus, she'll appreciate hearing from you. After all, that's the spirit that has always moved this nation forward. It's the spirit of citizenship the recognition that through hard work and responsibility, we can pursue our individual dreams, but still come together as one American family to make sure the next generation can pursue its dreams as well. Citizenship means standing up for everyone's right to vote. Last year, part of the Voting Rights Act was weakened. But conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats are working together to strengthen it; and the bipartisan commission I appointed last year has offered reforms so that no one has to wait more than a half hour to vote. Let's support these efforts. It should be the power of our vote, not the size of our bank account, that drives our democracy. Citizenship means standing up for the lives that gun violence steals from us each day. I have seen the courage of parents, students, pastors, and police officers all over this country who say "we are not afraid," and I intend to keep trying, with or without Congress, to help stop more tragedies from visiting innocent Americans in our movie theaters, shopping malls, or schools like Sandy Hook. Citizenship demands a sense of common cause; participation in the hard work of self-government; an obligation to serve to our communities. And I know this chamber agrees that few Americans give more to their country than our diplomats and the men and women of the United States Armed Forces. Tonight, because of the extraordinary troops and civilians who risk and lay down their lives to keep us free, the United States is more secure. When I took office, nearly 180,000 Americans were serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. Today, all our troops are out of Iraq. More than 60,000 of our troops have already come home from Afghanistan. With Afghan forces now in the lead for their own security, our troops have moved to a support role. Together with our allies, we will complete our mission there by the end of this year, and America's longest war will finally be over. After 2014, we will support a unified Afghanistan as it takes responsibility for its own future. If the Afghan government signs a security agreement that we have negotiated, a small force of Americans could remain in Afghanistan with NATO allies to carry out two narrow missions: training and assisting Afghan forces, and counterterrorism operations to pursue any remnants of al Qaeda. For while our relationship with Afghanistan will change, one thing will not: our resolve that terrorists do not launch attacks against our country. The fact is, that danger remains. While we have put al Qaeda's core leadership on a path to defeat, the threat has evolved, as al Qaeda affiliates and other extremists take root in different parts of the world. In Yemen, Somalia, Iraq, and Mali, we have to keep working with partners to disrupt and disable these networks. In Syria, we'll support the opposition that rejects the agenda of terrorist networks. Here at home, we'll keep strengthening our defenses, and combat new threats like cyberattacks. And as we reform our defense budget, we have to keep faith with our men and women in uniform, and invest in the capabilities they need to succeed in future missions. We have to remain vigilant. But I strongly believe our leadership and our security cannot depend on our military alone. As Commander-in-Chief, I have used force when needed to protect the American people, and I will never hesitate to do so as long as I hold this office. But I will not send our troops into harm's way unless it's truly necessary; nor will I allow our sons and daughters to be mired in open-ended conflicts. We must fight the battles that need to be fought, not those that terrorists prefer from us large-scale deployments that drain our strength and may ultimately feed extremism. So, even as we aggressively pursue terrorist networks through more targeted efforts and by building the capacity of our foreign partners America must move off a permanent war footing. That's why I've imposed prudent limits on the use of drones for we will not be safer if people abroad believe we strike within their countries without regard for the consequence. That's why, working with this Congress, I will reform our surveillance programs because the vital work of our intelligence community depends on public confidence, here and abroad, that the privacy of ordinary people is not being violated. And with the Afghan war ending, this needs to be the year Congress lifts the remaining restrictions on detainee transfers and we close the prison at Guantanamo Bay because we counter terrorism not just through intelligence and military action, but by remaining true to our Constitutional ideals, and setting an example for the rest of the world. You see, in a world of complex threats, our security and leadership depends on all elements of our power including strong and principled diplomacy. American diplomacy has rallied more than fifty countries to prevent nuclear materials from falling into the wrong hands, and allowed us to reduce our own reliance on Cold War stockpiles. American diplomacy, backed by the threat of force, is why Syria's chemical weapons are being eliminated, and we will continue to work with the international community to usher in the future the Syrian people deserve a future free of dictatorship, terror and fear. As we speak, American diplomacy is supporting Israelis and Palestinians as they engage in difficult but necessary talks to end the conflict there; to achieve dignity and an independent state for Palestinians, and lasting peace and security for the State of Israel a Jewish state that knows America will always be at their side. And it is American diplomacy, backed by pressure, that has halted the progress of Iran's nuclear program and rolled parts of that program back for the very first time in a decade. As we gather here tonight, Iran has begun to eliminate its stockpile of higher levels of enriched uranium. It is not installing advanced centrifuges. Unprecedented inspections help the world verify, every day, that Iran is not building a bomb. And with our allies and partners, we're engaged in negotiations to see if we can peacefully achieve a goal we all share: preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. These negotiations will be difficult. They may not succeed. We are clear-eyed about Iran's support for terrorist organizations like Hezbollah, which threaten our allies; and the mistrust between our nations cannot be wished away. But these negotiations do not rely on trust; any long-term deal we agree to must be based on verifiable action that convinces us and the international community that Iran is not building a nuclear bomb. If John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan could negotiate with the Soviet Union, then surely a strong and confident America can negotiate with less powerful adversaries today. The sanctions that we put in place helped make this opportunity possible. But let me be clear: if this Congress sends me a new sanctions bill now that threatens to derail these talks, I will veto it. For the sake of our national security, we must give diplomacy a chance to succeed. If Iran's leaders do not seize this opportunity, then I will be the first to call for more sanctions, and stand ready to exercise all options to make sure Iran does not build a nuclear weapon. But if Iran's leaders do seize the chance, then Iran could take an important step to rejoin the community of nations, and we will have resolved one of the leading security challenges of our time without the risks of war. Finally, let's remember that our leadership is defined not just by our defense against threats, but by the enormous opportunities to do good and promote understanding around the globe to forge greater cooperation, to expand new markets, to free people from fear and want. And no one is better positioned to take advantage of those opportunities than America. Our alliance with Europe remains the strongest the world has ever known. From Tunisia to Burma, we're supporting those who are willing to do the hard work of building democracy. In Ukraine, we stand for the principle that all people have the right to express themselves freely and peacefully, and have a say in their country's future. Across Africa, we're bringing together businesses and governments to double access to electricity and help end extreme poverty. In the Americas, we are building new ties of commerce, but we're also expanding cultural and educational exchanges among young people. And we will continue to focus on the Asia-Pacific, where we support our allies, shape a future of greater security and prosperity, and extend a hand to those devastated by disaster as we did in the Philippines, when our Marines and civilians rushed to aid those battered by a typhoon, and were greeted with words like, "We will never forget your kindness" and "God bless America!" We do these things because they help promote our long-term security. And we do them because we believe in the inherent dignity and equality of every human being, regardless of race or religion, creed or sexual orientation. And next week, the world will see one expression of that commitment when Team USA marches the red, white, and blue into the Olympic Stadium and brings home the gold. My fellow Americans, no other country in the world does what we do. On every issue, the world turns to us, not simply because of the size of our economy or our military might but because of the ideals we stand for, and the burdens we bear to advance them. No one knows this better than those who serve in uniform. As this time of war draws to a close, a new generation of heroes returns to civilian life. We'll keep slashing that backlog so our veterans receive the benefits they've earned, and our wounded warriors receive the health care including the mental health care that they need. We'll keep working to help all our veterans translate their skills and leadership into jobs here at home. And we all continue to join forces to honor and support our remarkable military families. Let me tell you about one of those families I've come to know. I first met Cory Remsburg, a proud Army Ranger, at Omaha Beach on the 65th anniversary of D-Day. Along with some of his fellow Rangers, he walked me through the program a strong, impressive young man, with an easy manner, sharp as a tack. We joked around, and took pictures, and I told him to stay in touch. A few months later, on his tenth deployment, Cory was nearly killed by a massive roadside bomb in Afghanistan. His comrades found him in a canal, face down, underwater, shrapnel in his brain. For months, he lay in a coma. The next time I met him, in the hospital, he couldn't speak; he could barely move. Over the years, he's endured dozens of surgeries and procedures, and hours of grueling rehab every day. Even now, Cory is still blind in one eye. He still struggles on his left side. But slowly, steadily, with the support of caregivers like his dad Craig, and the community around him, Cory has grown stronger. Day by day, he's learned to speak again and stand again and walk again and he's working toward the day when he can serve his country again. "My recovery has not been easy," he says. "Nothing in life that's worth anything is easy." Cory is here tonight. And like the Army he loves, like the America he serves, Sergeant First Class Cory Remsburg never gives up, and he does not quit. My fellow Americans, men and women like Cory remind us that America has never come easy. Our freedom, our democracy, has never been easy. Sometimes we stumble; we make mistakes; we get frustrated or discouraged. But for more than two hundred years, we have put those things aside and placed our collective shoulder to the wheel of progress to create and build and expand the possibilities of individual achievement; to free other nations from tyranny and fear; to promote justice, and fairness, and equality under the law, so that the words set to paper by our founders are made real for every citizen. The America we want for our kids a rising America where honest work is plentiful and communities are strong; where prosperity is widely shared and opportunity for all lets us go as far as our dreams and toil will take us none of it is easy. But if we work together; if we summon what is best in us, with our feet planted firmly in today but our eyes cast towards tomorrow I know it's within our reach. Believe it. God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.
***

State of the Union Address
Barack Obama
January 20, 2015

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, my fellow Americans:
 
We are 15 years into this new century.  Fifteen years that dawned with terror touching our shores; that unfolded with a new generation fighting two long and costly wars; that saw a vicious recession spread across our nation and the world.  It has been, and still is, a hard time for many. 
 
But tonight, we turn the page.  Tonight, after a breakthrough year for America, our economy is growing and creating jobs at the fastest pace since 1999.  (Applause.)  Our unemployment rate is now lower than it was before the financial crisis.  More of our kids are graduating than ever before.  More of our people are insured than ever before.  (Applause.)  And we are as free from the grip of foreign oil as we’ve been in almost 30 years.  (Applause.)
 
Tonight, for the first time since 9/11, our combat mission in Afghanistan is over.  (Applause.)  Six years ago, nearly 180,000 American troops served in Iraq and Afghanistan.  Today, fewer than 15,000 remain.  And we salute the courage and sacrifice of every man and woman in this 9/11 Generation who has served to keep us safe.  (Applause.)  We are humbled and grateful for your service.
 
America, for all that we have endured; for all the grit and hard work required to come back; for all the tasks that lie ahead, know this:  The shadow of crisis has passed, and the State of the Union is strong.  (Applause.)
 
At this moment -- with a growing economy, shrinking deficits, bustling industry, booming energy production -- we have risen from recession freer to write our own future than any other nation on Earth.  It’s now up to us to choose who we want to be over the next 15 years and for decades to come.
 
Will we accept an economy where only a few of us do spectacularly well?  Or will we commit ourselves to an economy that generates rising incomes and chances for everyone who makes the effort?  (Applause.)
 
Will we approach the world fearful and reactive, dragged into costly conflicts that strain our military and set back our standing?  Or will we lead wisely, using all elements of our power to defeat new threats and protect our planet?
 
Will we allow ourselves to be sorted into factions and turned against one another?  Or will we recapture the sense of common purpose that has always propelled America forward?
 
In two weeks, I will send this Congress a budget filled with ideas that are practical, not partisan.  And in the months ahead, I’ll crisscross the country making a case for those ideas.  So tonight, I want to focus less on a checklist of proposals, and focus more on the values at stake in the choices before us.
 
It begins with our economy.  Seven years ago, Rebekah and Ben Erler of Minneapolis were newlyweds.  (Laughter.)  She waited tables.  He worked construction.  Their first child, Jack, was on the way.  They were young and in love in America.  And it doesn’t get much better than that.  “If only we had known,” Rebekah wrote to me last spring, “what was about to happen to the housing and construction market.” 
 
As the crisis worsened, Ben’s business dried up, so he took what jobs he could find, even if they kept him on the road for long stretches of time.  Rebekah took out student loans and enrolled in community college, and retrained for a new career.  They sacrificed for each other.  And slowly, it paid off.  They bought their first home.  They had a second son, Henry.  Rebekah got a better job and then a raise.  Ben is back in construction -- and home for dinner every night.
 
“It is amazing,” Rebekah wrote, “what you can bounce back from when you have to…we are a strong, tight-knit family who has made it through some very, very hard times.”  We are a strong, tight-knit family who has made it through some very, very hard times.
 
America, Rebekah and Ben’s story is our story.  They represent the millions who have worked hard and scrimped, and sacrificed and retooled.  You are the reason that I ran for this office.  You are the people I was thinking of six years ago today, in the darkest months of the crisis, when I stood on the steps of this Capitol and promised we would rebuild our economy on a new foundation.  And it has been your resilience, your effort that has made it possible for our country to emerge stronger.
 
We believed we could reverse the tide of outsourcing and draw new jobs to our shores.  And over the past five years, our businesses have created more than 11 million new jobs.  (Applause.) 
 
We believed we could reduce our dependence on foreign oil and protect our planet.  And today, America is number one in oil and gas.  America is number one in wind power.  Every three weeks, we bring online as much solar power as we did in all of 2008.  (Applause.)  And thanks to lower gas prices and higher fuel standards, the typical family this year should save about $750 at the pump.  (Applause.) 
 
We believed we could prepare our kids for a more competitive world.  And today, our younger students have earned the highest math and reading scores on record.  Our high school graduation rate has hit an all-time high.  More Americans finish college than ever before.  (Applause.) 
 
We believed that sensible regulations could prevent another crisis, shield families from ruin, and encourage fair competition.  Today, we have new tools to stop taxpayer-funded bailouts, and a new consumer watchdog to protect us from predatory lending and abusive credit card practices.  And in the past year alone, about 10 million uninsured Americans finally gained the security of health coverage.  (Applause.) 
 
At every step, we were told our goals were misguided or too ambitious; that we would crush jobs and explode deficits.  Instead, we’ve seen the fastest economic growth in over a decade, our deficits cut by two-thirds, a stock market that has doubled, and health care inflation at its lowest rate in 50 years.  (Applause.)  This is good news, people.  (Laughter and applause.)
 
So the verdict is clear.  Middle-class economics works.  Expanding opportunity works.  And these policies will continue to work as long as politics don’t get in the way.  We can’t slow down businesses or put our economy at risk with government shutdowns or fiscal showdowns.  We can’t put the security of families at risk by taking away their health insurance, or unraveling the new rules on Wall Street, or refighting past battles on immigration when we’ve got to fix a broken system.  And if a bill comes to my desk that tries to do any of these things, I will veto it.  It will have earned my veto.  (Applause.) 
 
Today, thanks to a growing economy, the recovery is touching more and more lives.  Wages are finally starting to rise again.  We know that more small business owners plan to raise their employees’ pay than at any time since 2007.  But here’s the thing:  Those of us here tonight, we need to set our sights higher than just making sure government doesn’t screw things up; that government doesn’t halt the progress we’re making.  We need to do more than just do no harm.  Tonight, together, let’s do more to restore the link between hard work and growing opportunity for every American.  (Applause.) 
 
Because families like Rebekah’s still need our help.  She and Ben are working as hard as ever, but they’ve had to forego vacations and a new car so that they can pay off student loans and save for retirement.  Friday night pizza, that’s a big splurge.  Basic childcare for Jack and Henry costs more than their mortgage, and almost as much as a year at the University of Minnesota.  Like millions of hardworking Americans, Rebekah isn’t asking for a handout, but she is asking that we look for more ways to help families get ahead.
 
And in fact, at every moment of economic change throughout our history, this country has taken bold action to adapt to new circumstances and to make sure everyone gets a fair shot.  We set up worker protections, Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid to protect ourselves from the harshest adversity.  We gave our citizens schools and colleges, infrastructure and the Internet -- tools they needed to go as far as their effort and their dreams will take them.
 
That’s what middle-class economics is -- the idea that this country does best when everyone gets their fair shot, everyone does their fair share, everyone plays by the same set of rules.  (Applause.)  We don’t just want everyone to share in America’s success, we want everyone to contribute to our success.  (Applause.)
 
So what does middle-class economics require in our time? 
 
First, middle-class economics means helping working families feel more secure in a world of constant change.  That means helping folks afford childcare, college, health care, a home, retirement.  And my budget will address each of these issues, lowering the taxes of working families and putting thousands of dollars back into their pockets each year.  (Applause.)
 
Here’s one example.  During World War II, when men like my grandfather went off to war, having women like my grandmother in the workforce was a national security priority -- so this country provided universal childcare.  In today’s economy, when having both parents in the workforce is an economic necessity for many families, we need affordable, high-quality childcare more than ever.  (Applause.)
 
It’s not a nice-to-have -- it’s a must-have.  So it’s time we stop treating childcare as a side issue, or as a women’s issue, and treat it like the national economic priority that it is for all of us.  (Applause.)  And that’s why my plan will make quality childcare more available and more affordable for every middle-class and low-income family with young children in America -- by creating more slots and a new tax cut of up to $3,000 per child, per year.  (Applause.)
 
Here’s another example.  Today, we are the only advanced country on Earth that doesn’t guarantee paid sick leave or paid maternity leave to our workers.  Forty-three million workers have no paid sick leave -- 43 million.  Think about that.  And that forces too many parents to make the gut-wrenching choice between a paycheck and a sick kid at home.  So I’ll be taking new action to help states adopt paid leave laws of their own.  And since paid sick leave won where it was on the ballot last November, let’s put it to a vote right here in Washington.  (Applause.)  Send me a bill that gives every worker in America the opportunity to earn seven days of paid sick leave.  It’s the right thing to do.  It’s the right thing to do.  (Applause.)
 
Of course, nothing helps families make ends meet like higher wages.  That’s why this Congress still needs to pass a law that makes sure a woman is paid the same as a man for doing the same work.  (Applause.)  It’s 2015.  (Laughter.)  It’s time.  We still need to make sure employees get the overtime they’ve earned.  (Applause.)  And to everyone in this Congress who still refuses to raise the minimum wage, I say this:  If you truly believe you could work full-time and support a family on less than $15,000 a year, try it.  If not, vote to give millions of the hardest-working people in America a raise.  (Applause.)
 
Now, these ideas won’t make everybody rich, won’t relieve every hardship.  That’s not the job of government.  To give working families a fair shot, we still need more employers to see beyond next quarter’s earnings and recognize that investing in their workforce is in their company’s long-term interest.  We still need laws that strengthen rather than weaken unions, and give American workers a voice.  (Applause.)
 
But you know, things like childcare and sick leave and equal pay; things like lower mortgage premiums and a higher minimum wage -- these ideas will make a meaningful difference in the lives of millions of families.  That’s a fact.  And that’s what all of us, Republicans and Democrats alike, were sent here to do.

Second, to make sure folks keep earning higher wages down the road, we have to do more to help Americans upgrade their skills.  (Applause.)  America thrived in the 20th century because we made high school free, sent a generation of GIs to college, trained the best workforce in the world.  We were ahead of the curve.  But other countries caught on.  And in a 21st century economy that rewards knowledge like never before, we need to up our game.  We need to do more.
 
By the end of this decade, two in three job openings will require some higher education -- two in three.  And yet, we still live in a country where too many bright, striving Americans are priced out of the education they need.  It’s not fair to them, and it’s sure not smart for our future.  That’s why I’m sending this Congress a bold new plan to lower the cost of community college -- to zero.  (Applause.)   
 
Keep in mind 40 percent of our college students choose community college.  Some are young and starting out.  Some are older and looking for a better job.  Some are veterans and single parents trying to transition back into the job market.  Whoever you are, this plan is your chance to graduate ready for the new economy without a load of debt.  Understand, you’ve got to earn it.  You’ve got to keep your grades up and graduate on time. 

Tennessee, a state with Republican leadership, and Chicago, a city with Democratic leadership, are showing that free community college is possible.  I want to spread that idea all across America, so that two years of college becomes as free and universal in America as high school is today.  (Applause.)  Let’s stay ahead of the curve.  (Applause.)  And I want to work with this Congress to make sure those already burdened with student loans can reduce their monthly payments so that student debt doesn’t derail anyone’s dreams.  (Applause.) 
 
Thanks to Vice President Biden’s great work to update our job training system, we’re connecting community colleges with local employers to train workers to fill high-paying jobs like coding, and nursing, and robotics.  Tonight, I’m also asking more businesses to follow the lead of companies like CVS and UPS, and offer more educational benefits and paid apprenticeships -- opportunities that give workers the chance to earn higher-paying jobs even if they don’t have a higher education.
 
And as a new generation of veterans comes home, we owe them every opportunity to live the American Dream they helped defend.  Already, we’ve made strides towards ensuring that every veteran has access to the highest quality care.  We’re slashing the backlog that had too many veterans waiting years to get the benefits they need.  And we’re making it easier for vets to translate their training and experience into civilian jobs.  And Joining Forces, the national campaign launched by Michelle and Jill Biden -- (applause) -- thank you, Michelle; thank you, Jill -- has helped nearly 700,000 veterans and military spouses get a new job.  (Applause.)  So to every CEO in America, let me repeat:  If you want somebody who’s going to get the job done and done right, hire a veteran.  (Applause.)
 
Finally, as we better train our workers, we need the new economy to keep churning out high-wage jobs for our workers to fill.  Since 2010, America has put more people back to work than Europe, Japan, and all advanced economies combined.  (Applause.)
 
Our manufacturers have added almost 800,000 new jobs.  Some of our bedrock sectors, like our auto industry, are booming.  But there are also millions of Americans who work in jobs that didn’t even exist 10 or 20 years ago -- jobs at companies like Google, and eBay, and Tesla. 
 
So no one knows for certain which industries will generate the jobs of the future.  But we do know we want them here in America.  We know that.  (Applause.)  And that’s why the third part of middle-class economics is all about building the most competitive economy anywhere, the place where businesses want to locate and hire.
 
Twenty-first century businesses need 21st century infrastructure -- modern ports, and stronger bridges, faster trains and the fastest Internet.  Democrats and Republicans used to agree on this.  So let’s set our sights higher than a single oil pipeline.  Let’s pass a bipartisan infrastructure plan that could create more than 30 times as many jobs per year, and make this country stronger for decades to come.  (Applause.)  Let’s do it.  Let’s get it done.  Let’s get it done.  (Applause.)
 
Twenty-first century businesses, including small businesses, need to sell more American products overseas.  Today, our businesses export more than ever, and exporters tend to pay their workers higher wages.  But as we speak, China wants to write the rules for the world’s fastest-growing region.  That would put our workers and our businesses at a disadvantage.  Why would we let that happen?  We should write those rules.  We should level the playing field.  That’s why I’m asking both parties to give me trade promotion authority to protect American workers, with strong new trade deals from Asia to Europe that aren’t just free, but are also fair.  It’s the right thing to do.  (Applause.)
 
Look, I’m the first one to admit that past trade deals haven’t always lived up to the hype, and that’s why we’ve gone after countries that break the rules at our expense.  But 95 percent of the world’s customers live outside our borders.  We can’t close ourselves off from those opportunities.  More than half of manufacturing executives have said they’re actively looking to bring jobs back from China.  So let’s give them one more reason to get it done.
 
Twenty-first century businesses will rely on American science and technology, research and development.  I want the country that eliminated polio and mapped the human genome to lead a new era of medicine -- one that delivers the right treatment at the right time.  (Applause.)
 
In some patients with cystic fibrosis, this approach has reversed a disease once thought unstoppable.  So tonight, I’m launching a new Precision Medicine Initiative to bring us closer to curing diseases like cancer and diabetes, and to give all of us access to the personalized information we need to keep ourselves and our families healthier.  We can do this.  (Applause.)
 
I intend to protect a free and open Internet, extend its reach to every classroom, and every community -- (applause) -- and help folks build the fastest networks so that the next generation of digital innovators and entrepreneurs have the platform to keep reshaping our world.
 
I want Americans to win the race for the kinds of discoveries that unleash new jobs -- converting sunlight into liquid fuel; creating revolutionary prosthetics, so that a veteran who gave his arms for his country can play catch with his kids again.  (Applause.)  Pushing out into the solar system not just to visit, but to stay.  Last month, we launched a new spacecraft as part of a reenergized space program that will send American astronauts to Mars.  And in two months, to prepare us for those missions, Scott Kelly will begin a year-long stay in space.  So good luck, Captain.  Make sure to Instagram it.  We’re proud of you.  (Applause.) 
 
Now, the truth is, when it comes to issues like infrastructure and basic research, I know there’s bipartisan support in this chamber.  Members of both parties have told me so.  Where we too often run onto the rocks is how to pay for these investments.  As Americans, we don’t mind paying our fair share of taxes as long as everybody else does, too.  But for far too long, lobbyists have rigged the tax code with loopholes that let some corporations pay nothing while others pay full freight.  They’ve riddled it with giveaways that the super-rich don’t need, while denying a break to middle-class families who do.  
 
This year, we have an opportunity to change that.  Let’s close loopholes so we stop rewarding companies that keep profits abroad, and reward those that invest here in America.  (Applause.)  Let’s use those savings to rebuild our infrastructure and to make it more attractive for companies to bring jobs home.  Let’s simplify the system and let a small business owner file based on her actual bank statement, instead of the number of accountants she can afford.  (Applause.)  And let’s close the loopholes that lead to inequality by allowing the top one percent to avoid paying taxes on their accumulated wealth.  We can use that money to help more families pay for childcare and send their kids to college.  We need a tax code that truly helps working Americans trying to get a leg up in the new economy, and we can achieve that together.  (Applause.)  We can achieve it together. 
 
Helping hardworking families make ends meet.  Giving them the tools they need for good-paying jobs in this new economy.  Maintaining the conditions of growth and competitiveness.  This is where America needs to go.  I believe it’s where the American people want to go.  It will make our economy stronger a year from now, 15 years from now, and deep into the century ahead. 
 
Of course, if there’s one thing this new century has taught us, it’s that we cannot separate our work here at home from challenges beyond our shores. 
 
My first duty as Commander-in-Chief is to defend the United States of America.  In doing so, the question is not whether America leads in the world, but how.  When we make rash decisions, reacting to the headlines instead of using our heads; when the first response to a challenge is to send in our military -- then we risk getting drawn into unnecessary conflicts, and neglect the broader strategy we need for a safer, more prosperous world.  That’s what our enemies want us to do.
 
I believe in a smarter kind of American leadership.  We lead best when we combine military power with strong diplomacy; when we leverage our power with coalition building; when we don’t let our fears blind us to the opportunities that this new century presents.  That’s exactly what we’re doing right now.  And around the globe, it is making a difference.
 
First, we stand united with people around the world who have been targeted by terrorists -- from a school in Pakistan to the streets of Paris.  (Applause.)  We will continue to hunt down terrorists and dismantle their networks, and we reserve the right to act unilaterally, as we have done relentlessly since I took office to take out terrorists who pose a direct threat to us and our allies.  (Applause.)   
 
At the same time, we’ve learned some costly lessons over the last 13 years.  Instead of Americans patrolling the valleys of Afghanistan, we’ve trained their security forces, who have now taken the lead, and we’ve honored our troops’ sacrifice by supporting that country’s first democratic transition.  Instead of sending large ground forces overseas, we’re partnering with nations from South Asia to North Africa to deny safe haven to terrorists who threaten America. 
 
In Iraq and Syria, American leadership -- including our military power -- is stopping ISIL’s advance.  Instead of getting dragged into another ground war in the Middle East, we are leading a broad coalition, including Arab nations, to degrade and ultimately destroy this terrorist group.  (Applause.)  We’re also supporting a moderate opposition in Syria that can help us in this effort, and assisting people everywhere who stand up to the bankrupt ideology of violent extremism. 
 
Now, this effort will take time.  It will require focus.  But we will succeed.  And tonight, I call on this Congress to show the world that we are united in this mission by passing a resolution to authorize the use of force against ISIL.  We need that authority.  (Applause.)  
 
Second, we’re demonstrating the power of American strength and diplomacy.  We’re upholding the principle that bigger nations can’t bully the small -- by opposing Russian aggression, and supporting Ukraine’s democracy, and reassuring our NATO allies.  (Applause.) 
 
Last year, as we were doing the hard work of imposing sanctions along with our allies, as we were reinforcing our presence with frontline states, Mr. Putin’s aggression it was suggested was a masterful display of strategy and strength.  That's what I heard from some folks.  Well, today, it is America that stands strong and united with our allies, while Russia is isolated with its economy in tatters.  That’s how America leads -- not with bluster, but with persistent, steady resolve.  (Applause.)
 
In Cuba, we are ending a policy that was long past its expiration date.  (Applause.)  When what you’re doing doesn’t work for 50 years, it’s time to try something new.  (Applause.)  And our shift in Cuba policy has the potential to end a legacy of mistrust in our hemisphere.  It removes a phony excuse for restrictions in Cuba.  It stands up for democratic values, and extends the hand of friendship to the Cuban people.  And this year, Congress should begin the work of ending the embargo.  (Applause.)
 
As His Holiness, Pope Francis, has said, diplomacy is the work of “small steps.”  These small steps have added up to new hope for the future in Cuba.  And after years in prison, we are overjoyed that Alan Gross is back where he belongs.  Welcome home, Alan.  We're glad you're here.  (Applause.)
 
Our diplomacy is at work with respect to Iran, where, for the first time in a decade, we’ve halted the progress of its nuclear program and reduced its stockpile of nuclear material.  Between now and this spring, we have a chance to negotiate a comprehensive agreement that prevents a nuclear-armed Iran, secures America and our allies -- including Israel, while avoiding yet another Middle East conflict.  There are no guarantees that negotiations will succeed, and I keep all options on the table to prevent a nuclear Iran. 
 
But new sanctions passed by this Congress, at this moment in time, will all but guarantee that diplomacy fails -- alienating America from its allies; making it harder to maintain sanctions; and ensuring that Iran starts up its nuclear program again.  It doesn’t make sense.  And that's why I will veto any new sanctions bill that threatens to undo this progress.  (Applause.)  The American people expect us only to go to war as a last resort, and I intend to stay true to that wisdom.
 
Third, we’re looking beyond the issues that have consumed us in the past to shape the coming century.  No foreign nation, no hacker, should be able to shut down our networks, steal our trade secrets, or invade the privacy of American families, especially our kids.  (Applause.)  So we're making sure our government integrates intelligence to combat cyber threats, just as we have done to combat terrorism. 
 
And tonight, I urge this Congress to finally pass the legislation we need to better meet the evolving threat of cyber attacks, combat identity theft, and protect our children’s information.  That should be a bipartisan effort.  (Applause.)
 
If we don’t act, we’ll leave our nation and our economy vulnerable.  If we do, we can continue to protect the technologies that have unleashed untold opportunities for people around the globe.
 
In West Africa, our troops, our scientists, our doctors, our nurses, our health care workers are rolling back Ebola -- saving countless lives and stopping the spread of disease.  (Applause.)  I could not be prouder of them, and I thank this Congress for your bipartisan support of their efforts.  But the job is not yet done, and the world needs to use this lesson to build a more effective global effort to prevent the spread of future pandemics, invest in smart development, and eradicate extreme poverty.
 
In the Asia Pacific, we are modernizing alliances while making sure that other nations play by the rules -- in how they trade, how they resolve maritime disputes, how they participate in meeting common international challenges like nonproliferation and disaster relief.  And no challenge -- no challenge -- poses a greater threat to future generations than climate change.  (Applause.)   
 
2014 was the planet’s warmest year on record.  Now, one year doesn’t make a trend, but this does:  14 of the 15 warmest years on record have all fallen in the first 15 years of this century.  
I’ve heard some folks try to dodge the evidence by saying they’re not scientists; that we don’t have enough information to act.  Well, I’m not a scientist, either.  But you know what, I know a lot of really good scientists at NASA, and at NOAA, and at our major universities.  And the best scientists in the world are all telling us that our activities are changing the climate, and if we don’t act forcefully, we’ll continue to see rising oceans, longer, hotter heat waves, dangerous droughts and floods, and massive disruptions that can trigger greater migration and conflict and hunger around the globe.  The Pentagon says that climate change poses immediate risks to our national security.  We should act like it.  (Applause.) 
 
And that’s why, over the past six years, we’ve done more than ever to combat climate change, from the way we produce energy to the way we use it.  That’s why we’ve set aside more public lands and waters than any administration in history.  And that’s why I will not let this Congress endanger the health of our children by turning back the clock on our efforts.  I am determined to make sure that American leadership drives international action.  (Applause.) 
 
In Beijing, we made a historic announcement:  The United States will double the pace at which we cut carbon pollution.  And China committed, for the first time, to limiting their emissions.  And because the world’s two largest economies came together, other nations are now stepping up, and offering hope that this year the world will finally reach an agreement to protect the one planet we’ve got.
 
And there’s one last pillar of our leadership, and that’s the example of our values. 
 
As Americans, we respect human dignity, even when we’re threatened, which is why I have prohibited torture, and worked to make sure our use of new technology like drones is properly constrained.  (Applause.)  It’s why we speak out against the deplorable anti-Semitism that has resurfaced in certain parts of the world.  (Applause.)  It’s why we continue to reject offensive stereotypes of Muslims, the vast majority of whom share our commitment to peace.  That’s why we defend free speech, and advocate for political prisoners, and condemn the persecution of women, or religious minorities, or people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender.  We do these things not only because they are the right thing to do, but because ultimately they will make us safer.  (Applause.)
 
As Americans, we have a profound commitment to justice.  So it makes no sense to spend $3 million per prisoner to keep open a prison that the world condemns and terrorists use to recruit.  (Applause.)  Since I’ve been President, we’ve worked responsibly to cut the population of Gitmo in half.  Now it is time to finish the job.  And I will not relent in my determination to shut it down.  It is not who we are.  It’s time to close Gitmo.  (Applause.)

As Americans, we cherish our civil liberties, and we need to uphold that commitment if we want maximum cooperation from other countries and industry in our fight against terrorist networks.  So while some have moved on from the debates over our surveillance programs, I have not.  As promised, our intelligence agencies have worked hard, with the recommendations of privacy advocates, to increase transparency and build more safeguards against potential abuse.  And next month, we’ll issue a report on how we’re keeping our promise to keep our country safe while strengthening privacy.
 
Looking to the future instead of the past.  Making sure we match our power with diplomacy, and use force wisely.  Building coalitions to meet new challenges and opportunities.  Leading -- always -- with the example of our values.  That’s what makes us exceptional.  That’s what keeps us strong.  That’s why we have to keep striving to hold ourselves to the highest of standards -- our own.
 
You know, just over a decade ago, I gave a speech in Boston where I said there wasn’t a liberal America or a conservative America; a black America or a white America -- but a United States of America.  I said this because I had seen it in my own life, in a nation that gave someone like me a chance; because I grew up in Hawaii, a melting pot of races and customs; because I made Illinois my home -- a state of small towns, rich farmland, one of the world’s great cities; a microcosm of the country where Democrats and Republicans and Independents, good people of every ethnicity and every faith, share certain bedrock values.
 
Over the past six years, the pundits have pointed out more than once that my presidency hasn’t delivered on this vision.  How ironic, they say, that our politics seems more divided than ever.  It’s held up as proof not just of my own flaws -- of which there are many -- but also as proof that the vision itself is misguided, naïve, that there are too many people in this town who actually benefit from partisanship and gridlock for us to ever do anything about it.
 
I know how tempting such cynicism may be.  But I still think the cynics are wrong.  I still believe that we are one people.  I still believe that together, we can do great things, even when the odds are long.  (Applause.)
 
I believe this because over and over in my six years in office, I have seen America at its best.  I’ve seen the hopeful faces of young graduates from New York to California, and our newest officers at West Point, Annapolis, Colorado Springs, New London.  I’ve mourned with grieving families in Tucson and Newtown, in Boston, in West Texas, and West Virginia.  I’ve watched Americans beat back adversity from the Gulf Coast to the Great Plains, from Midwest assembly lines to the Mid-Atlantic seaboard.  I’ve seen something like gay marriage go from a wedge issue used to drive us apart to a story of freedom across our country, a civil right now legal in states that seven in 10 Americans call home.  (Applause.)
 
So I know the good, and optimistic, and big-hearted generosity of the American people who every day live the idea that we are our brother’s keeper and our sister’s keeper.  And I know they expect those of us who serve here to set a better example. 
 
So the question for those of us here tonight is how we, all of us, can better reflect America’s hopes.  I’ve served in Congress with many of you.  I know many of you well.  There are a lot of good people here, on both sides of the aisle.  And many of you have told me that this isn’t what you signed up for -- arguing past each other on cable shows, the constant fundraising, always looking over your shoulder at how the base will react to every decision.
 
Imagine if we broke out of these tired old patterns.  Imagine if we did something different.  Understand, a better politics isn’t one where Democrats abandon their agenda or Republicans simply embrace mine.  A better politics is one where we appeal to each other’s basic decency instead of our basest fears.  A better politics is one where we debate without demonizing each other; where we talk issues and values, and principles and facts, rather than “gotcha” moments, or trivial gaffes, or fake controversies that have nothing to do with people’s daily lives.  (Applause.)   
 
A politics -- a better politics is one where we spend less time drowning in dark money for ads that pull us into the gutter, and spend more time lifting young people up with a sense of purpose and possibility, asking them to join in the great mission of building America.
If we’re going to have arguments, let’s have arguments, but let’s make them debates worthy of this body and worthy of this country.  We still may not agree on a woman’s right to choose, but surely we can agree it’s a good thing that teen pregnancies and abortions are nearing all-time lows, and that every woman should have access to the health care that she needs.  (Applause.) 
Yes, passions still fly on immigration, but surely we can all see something of ourselves in the striving young student, and agree that no one benefits when a hardworking mom is snatched from her child, and that it’s possible to shape a law that upholds our tradition as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.  I’ve talked to Republicans and Democrats about that.  That’s something that we can share.
We may go at it in campaign season, but surely we can agree that the right to vote is sacred; that it’s being denied to too many -- (applause) -- and that on this 50th anniversary of the great march from Selma to Montgomery and the passage of the Voting Rights Act, we can come together, Democrats and Republicans, to make voting easier for every single American.  (Applause.) 
We may have different takes on the events of Ferguson and New York.  But surely we can understand a father who fears his son can’t walk home without being harassed.  And surely we can understand the wife who won’t rest until the police officer she married walks through the front door at the end of his shift.  (Applause.)  And surely we can agree that it’s a good thing that for the first time in 40 years, the crime rate and the incarceration rate have come down together, and use that as a starting point for Democrats and Republicans, community leaders and law enforcement, to reform America’s criminal justice system so that it protects and serves all of us.  (Applause.) 
That’s a better politics.  That’s how we start rebuilding trust.  That’s how we move this country forward.  That’s what the American people want.  And that’s what they deserve.
I have no more campaigns to run.  (Applause.)  My only agenda -- (laughter) -- I know because I won both of them.  (Applause.)  My only agenda for the next two years is the same as the one I’ve had since the day I swore an oath on the steps of this Capitol -- to do what I believe is best for America.  If you share the broad vision I outlined tonight, I ask you to join me in the work at hand.  If you disagree with parts of it, I hope you’ll at least work with me where you do agree.  And I commit to every Republican here tonight that I will not only seek out your ideas, I will seek to work with you to make this country stronger.  (Applause.) 
Because I want this chamber, I want this city to reflect the truth -- that for all our blind spots and shortcomings, we are a people with the strength and generosity of spirit to bridge divides, to unite in common effort, to help our neighbors, whether down the street or on the other side of the world.
I want our actions to tell every child in every neighborhood, your life matters, and we are committed to improving your life chances as committed as we are to working on behalf of our own kids.  (Applause.)  I want future generations to know that we are a people who see our differences as a great gift, that we’re a people who value the dignity and worth of every citizen -- man and woman, young and old, black and white, Latino, Asian, immigrant, Native American, gay, straight, Americans with mental illness or physical disability.  Everybody matters.  I want them to grow up in a country that shows the world what we still know to be true:  that we are still more than a collection of red states and blue states; that we are the United States of America.  (Applause.) 
I want them to grow up in a country where a young mom can sit down and write a letter to her President with a story that sums up these past six years:  “It’s amazing what you can bounce back from when you have to…we are a strong, tight-knit family who’s made it through some very, very hard times.”
My fellow Americans, we, too, are a strong, tight-knit family.  We, too, have made it through some hard times.  Fifteen years into this new century, we have picked ourselves up, dusted ourselves off, and begun again the work of remaking America.  We have laid a new foundation.  A brighter future is ours to write.  Let’s begin this new chapter together -- and let’s start the work right now.  (Applause.) 
Thank you.  God bless you.  God bless this country we love.  Thank you.  (Applause.) 
 



